rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org Research Cite this article: Owaki D, Kano T, Nagasawa K, Tero A, Ishiguro A. 2013 Simple robot suggests physical interlimb communication is essential for quadruped walking. J R Soc Interface 10: 20120669. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2012.0669 Received: 20 August 2012 Accepted: 3 October 2012 Subject Areas: biomimetics, biomechanics Keywords: quadruped locomotion, interlimb coordination, central pattern generator, physical interaction Author for correspondence: Dai Owaki e-mail: owaki@riec.tohoku.ac.jp Electronic supplementary material is available at http:/ /dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2012.0669 or via http://rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org. Simple robot suggests physical interlimb communication is essential for quadruped walking Dai Owaki1, Takeshi Kano 1, Ko Nagasawa 1, Atsushi Tero 2 and Akio Ishiguro 1,3 1Research Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8577, Japan 2Institute of Mathematics for Industry, Kyushu University, 744 Motooka, Nishi-ku, Fukuoka 819-0395, Japan 3CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, 7 Goban-cho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan Quadrupeds have versatile gait patterns, depending on the locomotion speed, environmental conditions and animal species. These locomotor patterns are generated via the coordination between limbs and are partly controlled by an intraspinal neural network called the central pattern generator (CPG). Although this forms the basis for current control para- digms of interlimb coordination, the mechanism responsible for interlimb coordination remains elusive. By using a minimalistic approach, we have developed a simple-structured quadruped robot, with the help of which we propose an unconventional CPG model that consists of four decoupled oscillators with only local force feedback in each leg. Our robot exhibits good adaptability to changes in weight distribution and walking speed simply by responding to local feedback, and it can mimic the walking patterns of actual quadrupeds. Our proposed CPG-based control method suggests that physical interaction between legs during movements is essential for interlimb coordination in quadruped walking. 1. Introduction Quadrupeds exhibit versatile gait patterns (walk, trot, pace, bound, etc.), in response to the locomotion speed and environmental conditions [1,2]. Further- more, in low-speed locomotion, different walking patterns are observed in different quadruped animals; horses exhibit a so-called lateral-sequence walk (L-S walk; figure 1 a), in which the feet touch down in the order right hind (RH), right fore (RF), left hind (LH) and left fore (LF), whereas primates exhibit a so-called diagonal-sequence walk (D-S walk; figure 1 b), in which the feet touch down in the order RH, LF, LH and RF [3 – 6]. Human beings are no excep- tion in that the crawling gait of infants gradually changes from an L-S walk to a D-S walk in the ontogeny [4,7]. These locomotor patterns are generated via the coordination of limb movements, i.e. interlimb coordination. However, the interlimb coordination mechanism responsible for the generation of such locomotor patterns is largely unknown. Thus, further clarification of this mechanism is required in order to design an adaptable and multi-functional quadruped robot as well as to understand the fundamental mechanism responsible for the remarkable abilities of quadrupeds. In order to elucidate the ability of animals to generate adaptive interlimb coordination, the locomotion generation mechanisms have been investigated by analysing neural systems. Well-known experiments that used decerebrated cats [8] have provided us with important insights into the locomotion of quad- ruped animals, and the results suggest that locomotion is controlled in part by an intraspinal neural network called the central pattern generator (CPG), which is capable of self-organizing coordinated movement patterns between legs [9,10]. These biological findings have prompted many researchers to inves- tigate the self-organized locomotor patterns in quadrupeds and various types of CPG neural network models have been proposed [11 – 22]. This forms the basis for the current control paradigms of interlimb coordination. However, & 2012 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved. Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 04 June 2021 these control paradigms have limitations because they ignore the effect of the body dynamics and environment on the resulting locomotor patterns. Hence, in previous studies, interlimb neural connections have been designed on a com- pletely ad hoc basis to obtain the desired locomotor patterns. Our approach is different: we propose an alternative con- trol paradigm based on a CPG model that consists of four decoupled oscillators with local sensory feedback from only a force sensor on each corresponding leg. Animal locomotion is not generated merely from neural systems, but rather from the tight interaction between neural systems, musculoskeletal systems and the real-world environment [23–26]. Thus, it is essential to elucidate the locomotion generation mechanism by analysing the interaction dynamics between these three sys- tems as well as by analysing the neural systems themselves. Therefore, we hypothesize that interlimb coordination should rely more on physical (or non-neural) interactions during leg movements through body dynamics rather than on explicit interlimb neural connections. Here, we present a simple-structured quadruped robot using a minimalistic approach and an unconventional CPG- based control scheme that does not require an interlimb neural connection and a predefined phase relationship but exploits the physical interaction during leg movements. Our robot exhibits good adaptability to changes in weight distri- bution and walking speed simply by responding to local feedback, and it can mimic the walking patterns of actual quadrupeds. The present results indicate that the weight distribution of a body plays a crucial role in the generation of quadruped walking patterns. Furthermore, the same behaviour in human and primate infants [4,7,27] strongly sup- ports the above conclusion. Our physical interaction-based approach [28,29] is expected to pave the way for establishing a design principle for adaptable and multi-functional robots and to clarify the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the generation of adaptive locomotion in animals. 2. Quadruped robot 2.1. Design strategies To design the quadruped robot based on the minimalistic approach, we employ three major simplifications: — Simplification 1. The use of a phase oscillator [30] as the basic component of the CPG circuit. We designed each leg such that it is controlled by only one oscillator in our CPG model. — Simplification 2. The use of a simple leg structure (no knee, no ankle), which allows us to ignore the intralimb coordi- nation in each leg, i.e. the coordination between joint movements within each leg. As shown in figure 2 b, the target position of the foot of the ith leg is actively con- trolled according to the corresponding oscillator phase fi. Further, the ith leg tends to lift off the ground (swing phase) for 0 /C20 fi , p, whereas it tends to remain on the ground to support the body (stance phase) for p /C20 fi , 2p (appendix B). — Simplification 3. The interlimb neural connection between the oscillators is ignored in order to generate the interlimb coordination by exploiting only local sensory information about the force in each leg that leads to the physical interaction during leg movements. 2.2. Mechanical structure Figure 2a shows the entire structure of the quadruped robot, which consists of a backbone segment and four leg segments LF (a) (b) (2) (3) (4) (1) (2) (3) (4) (1) LH RF RH 0 0 200 LF LH RF RH (%) 200 (%) Figure 1. Gait diagram in quadruped locomotion obtained from behavioural observations of animals. Highlighted regions represent the stance phase. ( a) A zebra’s lateral-sequence (L-S) walk (see electronic supplementary material, movie S1), in which the feet touch down in the order right hind (RH), right fore ( RF), left hind (LH) and left fore (LF). ( b) A Japanese monkey’s diagonal-sequence (D-S) walk (see electronic supplementary material, movie S2), in which the feet touch down in the order RH, LF, LH and RF. These photographs are frames from videos (see electronic supplementary material, movies S1 and S2) recorded at Yagiyama Zo ological Park. Captive animals housed in the zoo were videotaped using a CASIO EX-F1 at 600 frames per second as they walked on flat ground. rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org J R Soc Interface 10: 20120669 2 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 04 June 2021 with microprocessors. The total weight of the robot is around 1.6 kg, and the lengths of the backbone and each leg are 0.28 and 0.16 m, respectively. The detailed structure of the backbone segment is shown in appendix A and illustrates the structure of one leg segment. 2.3. Control algorithm We describe each phase oscillator that constitutes the CPG as follows: _fi ¼ v /C0 sNi cos fi; ð2:1Þ where v is the intrinsic angular velocity, and the second term expresses the local sensory feedback in terms of the parameter s, which is a positive constant describing the magnitude of the feedback to the corresponding oscillator,Ni is the ground reac- tion force (GRF) acting on the ith leg, which is detected by the pressure sensor in each foot (appendix A). We designed the local sensory feedback such that a leg remains in the stance phase while supporting the body (Ni . 0). With respect to equation (2.1), we note that the phase is mainly modulated to pull towards 3 p/2 in the stance phase when Ni . 0 because of the influence of the local sensory feedback (figure 2 c). For example, if a leg continues to bear a load ( Ni . 0) at the end of its stance phase ( fi /C25 2p), a phase delay is introduced in response to the magnitude of Ni, as shown in figure 2 d (the RH leg), which prevents the robot from entering the unstable two- legged-support state. This phase delay, which is introduced when /C0 sNi cos fi , 0, allows time for another leg (e.g. the RF leg) to enter the stance phase. As the other leg begins to support the body, the load on the RH leg decreases; conse- quently, the feedback decreases in magnitude, allowing the RH leg to enter the swing phase (figure 2 e). Therefore, the local sensory feedback, which allows the legs to maintain the stance phase by exploiting only the local force sensory information Ni from the foot, governs the appropriate relationship between the phases of the decoupled oscillators and the leg movements. 3. Experimental results We used the quadruped robot to investigate the effects of the local sensory feedback on steady gait, adaptability to changes in body properties, the transition between standing and walking motion, and transitions during a change in the walk- ing velocity. The control parameters and initial conditions of the phases are listed in table 1. 3.1. Steady gait Figure 3 a,b, respectively, shows the gait diagram and the phases, sin fi, during 0.0 – 14.0 s. The quadruped achieves steady walking motion by exploiting the local sensory feed- back. In the gait diagram, the highlighted regions represent the stance phase, which is distinguished by using the threshold data value from the force sensor. Thin stripes in the gait diagram represent oscillations of the force sensor data around the threshold value. The data in figure 3 b show that oscillator phases are mainly modified by the swing phase swing phase RH stance phase stance phase RHRF RHRF LH LH LHLF RF hind fore LF LF fore fore hind hind phase delay p w fi = 0 fi = 3p/2 fi = 0 A A' BBfi = p fi: oscillator phase (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) fi = p/2 –sNi cos fi Figure 2. (a) Constructed robot. ( b) Target trajectories. Boxed diagram illustrates target trajectory of RH leg on the basis of the oscillator phase. ( c) Dynamics in the phase oscillator depending on local sensory feedback. Phase is pulled towards 3 p/2 based on the local sensory feedback (indicated by the arrows). ( d,e) Physical effect of the local sensory feedback. ( d ) Phase delay introduced by /C0 sNi cosfi allows another leg to enter the stance phase. ( e) As the other leg begins to support the body, the feedback effect on the corresponding leg decreases, allowing it to enter the swing phase. rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org J R Soc Interface 10: 20120669 3 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 04 June 2021 local sensory feedback during the stance phase (sin fi , 0). Although we initially set all the phases to be fi ¼ 0 rad, the phase relationship immediately converges to the spatio- temporal pattern of a walking gait within approximately two periods. These results indicate that the phases of the oscillators are appropriately modified through local sensory feedback, leading to the generation of a walking gait. 3.2. Adaptability to bodily changes Here, we show the adaptability of our robot to changes in body properties by applying a load to the fore or hind (left and right) legs. Figure 4 a,b (see electronic supplementary material, movies S3 and S4, respectively) shows the gait diagrams of the quadruped over two cycles with a load of 0.12 kg on the forelegs and a load of 0.29 kg on the hindlegs, respectively. As the figures show, the gait diagrams differ from those obtained for the case without any load (figure 3 c). Table 2 lists the duty factors for the load and no load cases. The results quantitatively indicate that the duty factors of the legs bearing the load (the forelegs in figure 4a and the hindlegs in figure 4b) are larger than those of the legs bearing no load, as seen in figure 3 c. Moreover, in the gait shown in figure 4 a, the feet touch down in the L-S walk order. In contrast, the feet touch down in the D-S walk order in figure 4 b. These results demon- strate the high adaptability of our proposed control scheme to changes in the body properties without any need to provide the data about these changes beforehand. We calculated the average duty factor, which is defined by the stance period of one foot as a percentage of the gait LF (a) (c) (d) (b) 0 0 200 4 time (s) 81 2 04 time (s) 81 2 swing(ii) (i) (iii) stance swing stance LH RF RH LF LH RF RH LF LH RF RF RH RH sin fi sin fi (%) Figure 3. Experimental results of steady walking motion: ( a) the gait diagram during 0.0 – 14.0 s, (b) corresponding phases sin fi, and ( c) gait diagram over two cycles from 6.9 to 13.2 s in ( b). ( d ) A magnified version of the region marked with dotted lines in ( b) shows the physical effect of local force feedback. (Online version in colour.) Table 1. Control parameters and initial conditions. parameters values units v intrinsic angular velocity 0.04 rad s 21 s magnitude of sensory feedback 0.0052 rad s 21 N21 A positive y-direction amplitude of leg motion in a swing phase 0.09 m A’ negative y-direction amplitude of leg motion in a stance phase 0.03 m Bx -direction amplitude of leg motion 0.04 m f0(0) initial phase on LF leg’s oscillator 0 rad f1(0) initial phase on LH leg’s oscillator 0 rad f2(0) initial phase on RF leg’s oscillator 0 rad f3(0) initial phase on RH leg’s oscillator 0 rad rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org J R Soc Interface 10: 20120669 4 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 04 June 2021 cycle, and diagonality, which is the percentage of the cycle period by which the left (or right) hind footfall precedes the left (or right) fore footfall, over five walking periods from three trials for each type of mass distribution: no load (figure 3 c), load on the forelegs (figure 4 a) and load on the hindlegs (figure 4 b). The Hildebrand diagram [3 – 6], which is a plot of the diagonality against the duty factor obtained from our experimental results, is provided as figure 5. As the diagram quantitatively shows, the robot with a load on the forelegs exhibits an L-S walk, whereas the robot with a load on the hindlegs exhibits a D-S walk. 3.3. Adaptability to velocity changes Figure 6a,b (see electronic supplementary material, movie S5) shows the experimental results of the transition between standing and walking motion by changing v. In this exper- iment, we changed v from 0.4 to 0.0 rad s 21 at t ¼ 16.0 s and then back to 0.4 rad s 21 at t ¼ 26.0 s (indicated by the shaded region). As the figure illustrates, the proposed control scheme allows the robot to achieve rapid transitioning between standing and walking motion by only changing the parameter v. Figure 6c,d shows the experimental results of changing v to initiate a change in the walking velocity ( v changes from 0.4 to 0.6 rad s 21 at t ¼16.0 s and back to 0.4 rad s 21 at t ¼ 26.0 s). The results indicate that our robot exhibits spon- taneous transitioning during a change in the walking velocity. Moreover, we confirmed that the duty factor of each leg autonomously changes from 0.64 ( v ¼ 0.4) to 0.56 (v ¼ 0.6) in response to the velocity change. 4. Mathematical interpretation The results of the rapid convergence to steady walking (figure 3), the transition between standing and walking motion, and the LF (a) (b) (3) (3) (2) (2) (1) (1) (4) (4) LH RF RH 0 200 0 200 LF LH RF RH (%) (%) Figure 4. Experimental results of the gait for changes in body properties. ( a) With a load of 0.12 kg on the forelegs (see electronic supplementary material, movie S3), and ( b) with a load of 0.29 kg on the hindlegs (see electronic supplementary material, movie S4). The duty factors of the legs bearing the load (the forelegs in (a) and the hindlegs in ( b) are larger than those of the legs without a load. Table 2. Duty factors for different loading conﬁgurations. leg conﬁgurations LF LH RF RH no load 0.66 0.52 0.59 0.61 foreleg load 0.81 0.63 0.85 0.58 hindleg load 0.53 0.75 0.52 0.75 right hindleg load 0.51 0.59 0.59 0.76 100 75 50 duty factor (%) diagonality (%) 25 no load monkey rule horse rule camel rule load (0.12 kg) on forelegs load (0.29 kg) on hindlegs figure 4b D-S walkL-S walk figure 4a figure 3c 1007550250 Figure 5. Modified Hildebrand diagram [6]: the duty factor S is plotted against diagonality D in our experimental results. The solid lines represent the equations of the revised support – polygon model (monkey rule, D ¼ S; horse rule, D ¼ 100 2 S; and camel rule : D ¼ S 2 50). rsif.royalsocietypublishing.org J R Soc Interface 10: 20120669 5 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 04 June 2021 transitions during a change in the walking velocity (figure 6) strongly support the claim that the proposed CPG model allows the robot to exhibit stable and smooth transitioning between each behaviour. Mathematically, the proposed model (equation (2.1)) can be rewritten in terms of the active rotator model [31] as _fi ¼ v /C0 ai cos fi; ð4:1Þ where ai ¼ sNi is a parameter that determines the property of the phase dynamics: oscillatory or excitatory (appendix C). It should be noted that this model has also been considered in other physical contexts [32–34]. From the dynamics of the proposed model (equation (2.1)), we obtained the potential function V(fi) (appendix D), VðfiÞ¼/C0 vfi þ sNi sin fi: ð4:2Þ Figure 7 a shows the time evolution of the potential func- tion of our model, corresponding to the experiment of steady walking (figure 3). In this figure, the red line represents the trajectory of the phase fi over the potential function. Note that the local force feedback Ni modifies the shape of the potential function V(fi): when sNi ¼ 0, the potential function has a smooth slope, as shown in figure 7 b, in which the phase changes at a constant rate v, whereas when sNi . v, the potential function has a varying slope, as shown in figure 7 c, in which the phase converges to a local minimum and remains in that state. The time evolution of this potential function in respons