Discharges of Single Hindlimb Afferents in the Freely Moving Cat A. PROCHAZKA, R. A. WESTERMAN, AND S. P. ZICCONE Department of Physiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3168, Australia SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS I. Implanted semimicroelectrodes were used to record single afferent fiber discharges from L 7 dorsal roots during unrestrained walking in the conscious cat. 2. A series of tests were used to identify an afferent during a short period of anesthesia fol- lowing each recording session. The majority of afferents were from muscle spindle primary end- ings in hindlimb muscles. 3. Ankle extensor spindle primaries generally showed their highest firing rates during that phase of stepping in which they were passively stretched. During active muscle contraction there was evidence of fusimotor drive, although this was not usually sufficient to entirely over- come the unloading effect of rapid muscle short- ening. The variability of firing rate from cycle to cycle was considerably greater for the phase of active muscle contraction. The EMG response to brisk stretches of the ankle extensor muscle indicated a rapid (disynaptic or trisynaptic) reflex arc in the conscious animal. 4. Knee flexor spindle primaries showed simi- larly higher firing rates during passive muscle stretching in the step cycle. The shorter periods of presumed a-y coactivation corresponded to the much more phasic role of these muscles in stepping. 5. Tendon organs in the physiological exten- sors of the toes were mainly active during stance, although some discharges were usually seen during the swing phase. It is suggested that previous experiments on mesencephalic prep- arations may have led to an exaggerated view of the degree of a-y coactivation during n stepping movement S. INTRODUCTION ormal Received for publication January 19, 1976. cle spindle afferents in the jaw muscles of con- scious cats (27) and monkeys (5, 15) seems to differ from that expected from current theories. The bulk of the afferents showed an unexpec- tedly high firing rate during movements where their muscle was passively stretched, and gener- ally a surprisingly low degree of apparent fusi- motor drive during active contraction. This is at variance with data from anesthetized (4, 23) and decerebrate preparations (24, 25) where the large majority of muscle spindles were active mainly during muscle contraction. It is similarly at variance with the discharge patterns of presumed spindles in conscious hu- mans (26, 28, 29). However very few records of spindle discharge during actual movement have been presented by these latter workers. The joint movements never exceeded more than a few degrees. It should be pointed out that in most of the conscious recordings to date, the identification tests have generally been rather cursory and, therefore, at least some of the affer- ents may have innervated other types of recep- tors. In the present study, recordings of single fi- ber discharges were obtained from the L, dor- sal roots of fully conscious cats during normal walking. This involved the implantation of dor- sal root semimicroelectrodes, which have been described in preliminary reports ( 18, 20). An important aspect of the experiments was the identification procedure, which took place during short periods of anesthesia immediately after each afferent recording session. This al- lowed physiological and pharmacological testing of the given afferent under controlled condi- tions. Due to the relatively large electrode tips, the recordings heavily favored group I afferents. The electrodes were “free-floating” and, there- fore, single-fiber recordings relied on chance movements of the electrode tips into stable loca- tions near dorsal root axons. Fortunately, this was generally found to occur at least two or three times over the course of a few days. As a result, recordings were obtained of the activity AFFERENT DISCHARGE DURING STEPPING 1091 of a population of carefully identified hindlimb afferents during normal large-scale movements. METHODS The discharges of 28 single afferent nerve fi- bers were recorded from spinal roots during walking in 10 cats (2.5-3 kg). Of these afferents, 20 were identified physiologically during short periods of anesthesia which immediately fol- lowed each walking session. The nerve fiber dis- charges and associated muscle length and elec- tromyogram (EMG) were recorded using radio telemetry. Dorsal root electrodes Each electrode was made from a 15mm length of 17-pm insulated Karma alloy wire (Driver Harris Ltd., Stockport, Cheshire, England). The insulation was stripped 2 or 3 mm from each end by applying pressure with a micrometer. One end was given three coats of varnish (Epoxylite 3000 M), with 30 min baking at 150°C between each coat. One varnished end was now cut to a bevel using a scalpel blade mounted over a glass slide bearing the wire. The other end was wound around and soldered onto a shielded insulated connecting wire (Cooner AS632). This junction was insulated with a coating of silicone wax (Dow Corning 630) and a further coating of silicone elastomer (Dow Corning 384). Smaller diameter (10 pm) wires were used in two implants, but their Teflon insulation proved to be insufficiently resilient. Electrode stability The maximum time after implantation for which single-fiber recordings could still be ob- tained was 10 days. Essentially, the technique relies on the chance juxtaposition of the dorsal I root electrode tip and an afferent fiber. As the tip dimensions are relatively large, one would ex- pect to record single-fiber discharge trains only from the larger afferents and this has, in fact, been borne out by the results. Some electrodes were not selective enough, some were unstable, and some remained silent throughout. The usual cause of final failure was the withdrawal of the wire from the root. How- ever, the number of times stable recordings were obtained was remarkable considering the pre- sumably large relative movements of spinal structures in the freely behaving animal. EMG electrodes The EMG electrodes, modified from those de- scribed previously (19), were made from pairs of flexible multistrand insulated stainless steel wire; 1 mm of insulation was stripped from the ends. A 4-cm length of 5/O silk suture thread was tied to each wire some 2 mm from the end, and the wire was folded back at the knot. The thread was passed through the muscle using a 216 nee- dle, and the bared portion of wire was then pulled into the muscle. The thread was now sewn into a 2-mm-diameter, 200~pm-thick plas- tic button so that the button lay flush with the surface of the muscle. Electrodes implanted in this way were found to remain in place for many weeks. Muscle -length gauges The mercury-in-rubber length gauges ( 19) were modified so that the contacts at either end simply consisted of tapered platinum rods thrust into the lumen of the tubing. The tubing at each end of the gauge was formed into a 3-mm- diameter loop and embedded in a few drops of dental acrylic. The loops reduced the direct forces tending to pull the rubber tubing away from the platinum contacts. Implantation A laminectomy (removal of L7 spinous pro- cess and laminae) were performed with halo- thane anesthesia. Precautions were taken to en- sure the maximum possible degree of sterility. Pairs of dorsal root electrodes were stuck to the dura with drops of isobutyl cyanoacrylate. The electrode tips were manually inserted through a small slit in the dura into L, dorsal root bundles just proximal to the ganglion. The connecting cable was passed subcutaneously to the head. EMG electrodes were implanted in the biceps femoris and lateral gastrocnemius muscles. A length gauge was implanted between the cal- caneum and the head of the tibia (19). Connect- ing cables were passed subcutaneously to the head, along with a heparinized catheter from the jugular vein. The cable sockets and catheter hub were now embedded in acrylic around two skull screws. A prefabricated plastic bayonet socket was in- cluded in the skull cap. This provided a mount- ing for the detachable telemeter capsule. The implantation procedure lasted from 2.5 to 3.5 h. The cat was treated with penicillin and local anesthetics and allowed to recover for 24 h before recording was attempted. Telemetry devices The plastic telemeter capsule (2 x 2.5 x 3 cm) held two battery-driven FM transmitters. One was a two-channel (EMG and length) device de- scribed previously ( 19). The second transmitter was a high-gain 200-Ma input-impedance de- 1092 PROCHAZKA, WESTERMAN, AND ZICCONE vice, using essentially the same high-gain am- plifier and oscillator as the first, but with a field effect transistor source-follower input stage. Experimental procedures Recording sessions commenced the day af- ter implantation. The telemetry capsules were clipped onto the animal’s head, and miniature plugs were mated with their appropriate sockets (Fig. 1). The animal walked over a flat surface to re- trieve food pellets. The three channels of trans- mitted recordings were decoded by FM receiv- ers and recorded on magnetic tape using a Tandberg 100 FM tape recorder. In some exper- iments, a Statham pressure transducer measured the downward force exerted on a 2 cm x 2 cm thrust plate. Single nerve fiber discharges were recorded for some 20 or 30 steps. The telemetry EMG connector was now changed over so as to record from the other pair of EMG electrodes, and an- other 20 or 30 steps were recorded. The cat was then quickly anesthetized via the indwelling jugular catheter using a short-duration anesthet- ic: methohexital sodium (Lilly). The afferent was then carefully identified. Afferent identijkation The receptor was located by its discharge re- sponse to palpation, muscle stretch, and discrete skin stimuli. The maximum elicitable dynamic index was obtained by rapid and maintained stretches of the appropriate muscle (Fig. 2A). Taps of graded amplitude and speed were applied over the receptor region (Fig. W). Vi- bration from 10 to 1,000 Hz was applied over the appropriate tendons and muscles (e.g., Fig. 2E: instantaneous firing frequency of an afferent dur- ing vibration at 360 Hz). If on the basis of the responses to these stimuli the afferent was suspected of innervating a mus- cle receptor, the muscle was stimulated electri- cally using a surface electrode consisting of two sharp stainless steel wires 6 mm apart pressed down onto the skin. Spindle afferents are gener- ally silenced during a small twitch contraction of their parent muscle, the primaries showing a rapid discharge in the descending phase of the twitch (Fig. 2C), whereas tendon organ afferents increase their firing in the ascending phase. A dose of succinylcholine chloride (200 pglkg) was administered via the jugular catheter. This selectively increases the dynamic index of spin- dle primaries (22). Figure 2B shows the dynamic FIG. 1. Block diagram showing the telemetry system. Two separate FM transmitters were carried in the detachable capsule on the cat’s head. One amplified and transmitted nerve spikes from the dorsal root microelec- trode. The other was a two-channel device, handling both the length gauge and EMG signals. The transmitted signals were demodulated at the two receivers and recorded on magnetic tape. A small thrust-plate transducer was sometimes used to monitor downward force for one stance phase of a sequence of steps. The hub of a jugular catheter was included in the head socket. This allowed intravenous administration of short-term anesthetic. AFFERENT DISCHARGE DURING STEPPING 1093 --.- . . _.. . . ..’ . . . . _. _: . . . . . . .- ..,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . O-5 set 1 10mm 1200 i/S 1 10mm ]2OOi/S E 10Omsec 0*5 set 1 200 i/s FIG. 2. Responses of a muscle spindle primary afferent to routine identification tests. A : instantaneous firing frequency (bottom trace) in response to rapid and then maintained muscle stretch (length gauge record: upper trace). B: same test after succinylcholine. C: response to electrically evoked muscle twitch. Stimulus artifact followed by a pause in discharge, then rapid resumption of firing at the end of twitch. D: discharge responses to light taps over muscle belly. Note high dynamic sensitivity. E: instantaneous firing frequency during vibration at 360 Hz over tendon. One-to-one following achieved after small adjustments of position of vibrator probe. response of the same spindle afferent as in Fig. 2A, 1 min after a dose of succinylcholine. The range of tests used on each afferent re- duced to a minimum the possibility of false localization and identification. Doubts raised after one or two tests (e.g., a high vibration sensitivity and medium dynamic index) were dispelled by the responses to the further tests (e.g., no succinylcholine effects, rapid discharge during ascending phase of muscle twitch). The criteria used to classify an afferent as a spindle primary were: silencing during small electrically evoked muscle twitches with a phasic response on the descending phase, high dynamic sensitivity to taps and stretches, high sensitivity to vibration over the muscle belly and tendon at frequencies above 100 Hz, a large in- crease in dynamic index after succinylcholine. Spindle secondary criteria: silencing during small electrically evoked muscle twitches; low dynamic sensitivity; low vibration sensitivity, especially over the tendon; no increase in dy- namic index after succinylcholine, but some in- crease in tonic firing rate. Tendon organ criteria: accelerated discharge during muscle twitch; medium dynamic sensitiv- ity to taps; low, medium, or high sensitivity to vibration; no change in dynamic index or tonic firing frequency after succinylcholine. The initial fasciculations caused by intravenous doses of succinylcholine may cause phasic increases in tendon organ firing rate, but this effect only lasts a few seconds. The passive stretch sensitivity of tendon organs increases at lighter levels of anes- thesia when some muscle tone is present. A technique using obliquely cut wire elec- trodes fixated at the L7 spinous process has been developed independently by G. E. Loeb, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. This technique has yielded recordings of the dis- charges of single cells in the dorsal root ganglion during locomotion in the conscious cat (personal communication). RESULTS Step cycle correlates The EMG activity of the main hindlimb mus- cle groups has been shown to relate closely to the various phases of the step cycle (2, 3). Figure 3 shows a recording of the length of the triceps surae muscles (ankle extensors), lateral gastrocnemius muscle EMG, and the forces exerted downward by first the front, and then the hind paws on a small pressure plate during walking. The symbols F, El, E2, and E3 refer to the four phases of the step cycle defined by Philippson (17), and analyzed in detail by Gos- low, Reinking, and Stuart (6). Flexion (F) of the ankle joint begins as the foot 1094 PROCHAZKA, WESTERMAN, AND ZICCONE 1 5mm 1 2ON 1 O-5 set I FIG. 3. Muscle length and EM G activity during the step cycle. Top trace: signal from length gauge in parallel with the ankle extensor muscles of the left hindlimb. Middle trace: EMG from lateral gastrocnemius muscle. Bottom trace: thrust-plate force signal for one stance phase only (first peak has been dashed to indicate that it refers to forepaw thrust). Phases of step cycle (F, El, E2, and E3) after Philippson (17). Hindlimb joint angles after Goslow et al. (6). Measurements oft 1, t2, t 3, and t 4 were made for a large number of step cycles of different amplitude and duration. is lifted from the ground for the forward swing. The triceps group is passively stretched during F. The first extension (El) is accompanied by electrical activity in these muscles, and corre- sponds to the lowering of’ the foot toward the ground. On foot contact, the triceps muscles are generally stretched slightly (E2), and the active stance phase then continues into E3 as the ani- mal’s center of gravity moves forward. Because some of the afferent recordings lacked a muscle length record, it was necessary in these cases to estimate the relative timing of the phases of the step cycle from the onset and cessation of lateral gastrocnemius EMG. Measurements of tI , t2, t3, and t4 as defined in Fig. 3, were made from filmed recordings of 120 step cycles from each of two cats walking nor- mally over a flat surface. The onset and cessa- tion of EMG were established using a criterion level of 5% of the average EMG during stance. Figure 4 shows that t4, the time from onset of EMG to foot contact, was relatively constant (70 t 25 ms (SD)) for a large number of steps of widely differing duration. On the other hand, t2 AFFERENT DISCHARGE DURING STEPPING 1095 250 0; 1 1 1 1 1 I 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 t, (msec) FIG. 4. Time relationships defined in Fig. 3 related to periods of silence of lateral gastrocnemius muscle (tl) for 120 step cycles. Each ordinate is an average of values over a range of 50 ms of t 1. Standard deviations were calculated for an average of 12 values in each case. The top and middle graphs show that times from start and end of flexion to onset of EMG increase with increasing duration of EM G silence. The bottom graph shows a relative constancy of latency of EMG onset to foot contact. The low standard deviations (ca. 25 ms) allow estimates of t 2, t3, and t4 from a knowl- edgeoft,. and t3 increased with increases in step duration. Bet ause of the constancy of t4, it was found that for very short steps, the short duration of the El phase meant that the EMG onset sometimes oc- curred during the F phase (negative values of t3). The variability in the above latencies was at least partially attributable to the different speeds and pos tural relationships during the steps. No attempt was made to standardize such param- eters, although the mode of locomotion always remained walking (as opposed to trotting). Nev- ertheless, the standard deviation of latencies for any given value of tl was sufficiently low to allow relatively accurate predictions of phase. It should be mentioned here that the range of values of t, (125-360 ms) was much larger than the range of durations of swing (t2 + t4): 165-290 ms. Relatively small increases in the duration of the swing phase are coupled with larger in- creases in the duration of the E3 phase, and a correspondingly earlier reduction in EMG activ- ity toward the end of stance. In the subsequent recordings, the EMG of the lateral gastrocnemius and biceps femoris mus- cles were taken as representative of the activity of the combined ankle extensors and the com- bined biarticulate hamstring group, respectively. The validity of this comparison will be discussed later. Types of afferents Only those afferents whose discharges were recorded for at least 5 min are reported here. Of the 28 afferents held during walking, 5 were lost prior to or during the induction of anesthesia and 3 were lost during the identification tests. Of the 20 afferents identified, 15 were spindle primaries, 2 were tendon organ afferents, 2 were from slowly adapting skin receptors, and 1 was from a rapidly adapting skin receptor. No re- cordings have yet been obtained from spindle secondaries. The distribution of Ia afferents was as follows: dorsal femoral (hamstrings), 6; triceps surae, 5; gluteal muscles, 2; flexor digitorum longus, 1; intrinsic foot muscle, 1. Both tendon organs were located in the flexor digitorum longus ten- don (in different cats). One slowly adapting skin receptor was located over the gluteal region and the other on a footpad, and the rapidly adapting skin receptor was located over the hamstring muscles. There exists in the literature a vast amount of neurophysiological data on the ankle extensors, particularly the soleus muscle. For this reason, the ankle extensor spindle primary recordi