Control for multifunctionality: bioinspired control based on feeding in Aplysia californica Victoria A. Webster-Wood1,2,3, Jeffrey P. Gill4, Peter J. Thomas5,6,7, Hillel J. Chiel8,9,10 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 2Department of Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 3McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 4Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 2080 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-7080, USA 5Department of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4901, USA 6Department of Biology, Department of Cognitive Science, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4901, USA 7Department of Electrical Computer and Systems Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4901, USA 8Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 2080 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-7080, USA 9Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, 2080 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-7080, USA 10Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 2080 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, OH 44106-7080, USA Abstract Animals exhibit remarkable feats of behavioral flexibility and multifunctional control that remain challenging for robotic systems. The neural and morphological basis of multifunctionality in animals can provide a source of bioinspiration for robotic controllers. However, many existing approaches to modeling biological neural networks rely on computationally expensive models and tend to focus solely on the nervous system, often neglecting the biomechanics of the periphery. As a consequence, while these models are excellent tools for neuroscience, they fail to predict functional behavior in real time, which is a critical capability for robotic control. To meet the need for real-time multifunctional control, we have developed a hybrid Boolean model framework Victoria A. Webster-Wood, vwebster@andrew.cmu.edu. Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. HHS Public Access Author manuscript Biol Cybern. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 October 25. Published in final edited form as: Biol Cybern. 2020 December ; 114(6): 557–588. doi:10.1007/s00422-020-00851-9. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript capable of modeling neural bursting activity and simple biomechanics at speeds faster than real time. Using this approach, we present a multifunctional model of Aplysia californica feeding that qualitatively reproduces three key feeding behaviors (biting, swallowing, and rejection), demonstrates behavioral switching in response to external sensory cues, and incorporates both known neural connectivity and a simple bioinspired mechanical model of the feeding apparatus. We demonstrate that the model can be used for formulating testable hypotheses and discuss the implications of this approach for robotic control and neuroscience. Keywords Multifunctionality; Computational neuroscience; Aplysia ; Biomechanics; Control; Bioinspired 1 Introduction Multifunctionality, a basis for behavioral flexibility, is critical for navigating and adapting to a complex changing environment. In animals as well as humans, multifunctionality is observed across a wide range of behaviors. Living systems must smoothly shift from one behavior to another while varying specific behaviors to handle changing environmental conditions. Even relatively simple organisms demonstrate multifunctional control. For example, grass-cutter ants use their mandibles to cut stalks of grass, carry them to the nest, and manipulate them once in their nests [127]; frogs exhibit swimming, walking, and hopping gaits [142,143]. The tremendous range and adaptability of control are observed even more strongly in human manipulation: humans can use their hands to lift barbells substantially heavier than their own body weight, but also use the very same hands to play complex piano concertos. Despite the obvious importance of multifunctionality for animal systems, truly multifunctional control remains a challenge for robotics [129]. To develop robotic controllers for multifunctional behavior, one possible approach would be to develop a methodology that can map multifunctional biological systems onto simulated devices or robots. Such a methodology would enable researchers to develop control architectures through rapid prototyping and simulation. The controllers could then be effectively improved by comparison to the original biological system and by assessing their effectiveness as a simulated controller for an artificial device. Including known neurons, connections, and biomechanics underlying multifunctional behavior allows the models to immediately suggest testable experimental hypotheses, clarifying the biological mechanisms of multifunctionality. At the same time, to make the simulation useful for artificial or robotic devices, the modeling framework should run faster than real time. A computationally efficient, biologically relevant framework could then lead to direct real-time control of the original biological system and of an artificial robotic system, and thus provide a bridge from neuroscience to robotics. What mediates multifunctional behavior in biological nervous systems, and what can we learn from them for robotic control? Three alternative neural architectures have been proposed for multifunctional control: dedicated control circuits, population-based control Webster-Wood et al. Page 2 Biol Cybern. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 October 25. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript circuits, and re-organizing control circuits [109]. The first alternative dedicates a control circuit to each behavioral function. For example, an escape circuit might suppress and override a swimming circuit [69]. Functionally decomposing behavior, and assigning dedicated control to each function, has historically been the traditional approach to robotic control, such as in traditional finite state machines [102,112,125,131]. The drawback is that controlling a wide repertoire of behaviors can lead to a combinatorial explosion, making this approach impractical in general, and it is clearly not used for most animal behaviors. A second alternative is encoding solutions through the activity of a neuronal population. For example, the direction of a motor response may be encoded by a broadly tuned population of neurons [50,51,132]. Population encoding is the basis of many machine learning approaches to robotic control [135]. A drawback of this solution is that it is difficult to isolate subnetworks with specific functionalities, so it can be difficult to understand how the system works. A third possibility, which appears to be a more common solution in biological systems [109], is that of reorganizing circuits: by varying the timing and phasing of activity and incorporating feedback from the periphery (body), single circuits can be reconfigured to produce several multifunctional behaviors. For example, the same multifunctional circuit in crustacea can be reconfigured to generate qualitatively different ingestive behaviors [133,134]. Despite increasing evidence that this third alternative may be the most common for biological control, relatively few robotic control architectures are based on this solution. How can one effectively implement any of the three neural architectures for multifunctionality? One possibility is to use machine learning to allow the controller to “learn” a multifunctional network architecture. Machine learning has led to many applications and predictive modeling approaches by relying on large training datasets and intense computational power [1,56,61,68,78,145,156,163]. Since the relationship between network form and function is often very complex, it has not been easy to understand how the resulting networks actually function, or to use them to direct experimental analyses of an actual biological system. Thus, another approach has been to develop detailed models of individual neurons and networks based on actual experimental measurements; the detailed dynamics of individual neurons can be approximated using multiconductance, multicompartment biophysical models [45,64,89]. The drawback of this approach is that large numbers of parameters must be set experimentally, and given the variability within nervous systems, the resulting network may not capture the original dynamics of the system [8,57,100,124]. A potential third way has been to use more phenomenological neural models to capture aspects of neural architecture and dynamics with a greatly reduced set of parameters, and these have been successfully used for biological modeling and control [123] including those inspired by insects [9,10,18,151,152], lobsters [2-4], Pleurobranchaea [17], lampreys [19,85,123] and fish [44], salamanders [11,58], and other tetrapods [70,71]. Possible nominal model approaches to capture neural circuit dynamics include the use of integrate-and-fire neurons [77,105,153], rate models [161], discrete asynchronous event­ based models [6], and at the simplest level, Boolean models or finite automata [2,128,131]. Integrate-and-fire nodes have been successfully implemented in synthetic nervous systems using neuron pool circuit models for robotic control [70,71,151,152]. However, the complexity of the animal models used for bioinspiration precludes the possibility of Webster-Wood et al. Page 3 Biol Cybern. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 October 25. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript capturing full circuit connectivity or individual identifiable neurons. Population firing rate models are often used to represent neural activity for therapeutic brain–machine interface technologies development [93,95,115]. Firing-rate models of neural networks go back at least to the Wilson–Cowan equations [40,160,161] and have helped understand neural behaviors as diverse as spontaneous pattern formation [46], processing of sensory input signals [7,16,162], and motor control [8,24,62,138,140,145]. Boolean network models, being closely related to finite state machines, originated with the seminal study by McCulloch and Pitts [102] and have found application in robotics and as reduced models of biological systems such as gene regulatory and signal transduction networks [39,42,52,88,117-119,130]. Of these nominal models, Boolean network models likely provide the lowest computational cost, while still capturing the overall on/off behavior of neuronal bursting. Such models have been used to describe neural activity recorded during multifunctional behaviors [2] and are the foundation of finite automata [102]. Boolean network models can be used to capture a wide range of biological phenomena [37,59,117,119,141] and can even be extended to capture stochastic processes [126]. In many neural models, the focus is on the network controller, without accounting for the dynamics of the periphery, or body. For applications in bioinspired robotic control, a computational modeling approach is needed that captures both the dynamics of the neural circuitry and the critical interactions between the brain, the body, and the environment [23,27]. As with neural components, a variety of models have been developed to capture the nonlinear properties of individual muscles and their organization into muscular structures [169]. The complexity of such muscle models can vary from capturing muscle biochemical kinetics using a cross-bridge model [43,60,122,166,168] to spring–damper representations such as used in the linear Hill muscle model [63,136]. Such models can be fit to match muscle physiology observed in animal systems [167] and used to model complex musculature such as muscular hydrostats [25]. When modeling or fitting muscle models to experimental data, individuality, and variability of model parameters is important, and one should not use average values [13-15]. However, fitting to individual values creates additional computational overhead, and it is possible that the model may not capture the behavior of a range of individuals. Fundamentally, the role of these muscle models is to capture the integration of muscle activation dynamics into a resulting tension. Once again, although these muscle models are important for modeling mechanical systems, complex structures involving both the kinematics and kinetics of multiple muscles, in general, will have high computational overhead [116,148,149]. Thus, if a simulation is to run faster than real time and be able to be rapidly fit to a given individual, one must use simplified models. For the work presented here, we were interested in generating a model that can run faster than real time, and have done this using a very simplified muscle model for the biomechanics. To meet the need for computationally efficient, explainable, multifunctional controllers, we have developed a hybrid Boolean network model framework, i.e., primarily using Boolean network elements but using continuous mechanical models. This framework combines discrete Boolean logic calculations of neural activity with simplified semi-continuous second-order muscle dynamics and peripheral mechanics. To our knowledge, mixed Boolean (neural)/continuous (biomechanical) models have not previously been used for motor Webster-Wood et al. Page 4 Biol Cybern. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 October 25. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript control. The use of Boolean logic for capturing neural activity results in a computationally efficient control algorithm that can run faster than real time. The use of a simplified model of the peripheral mechanics provides sufficient sensory feedback for the controller to adjust to changing environmental conditions and allows key characteristics of each of the multifunctional behaviors to be observed. To demonstrate mapping from a known multifunctional biological system, an animal model is needed with a relatively small neural network controlling a well-understood musculature. Therefore, we demonstrate this model framework for multifunctional control using the experimentally tractable model system of feeding in the marine mollusk Aplysia californica. The resulting model controls a simplified mechanical model of the feeding apparatus and successfully demonstrates ingestive behaviors, including biting and swallowing, as well as rejection of inedible materials. In this paper, we will first describe prior models of the Aplysia feeding neural circuitry and periphery, then describe our novel Boolean model framework. We will demonstrate how the hybrid Boolean controller is developed based on observations from behavioral, biomechanical, and electrophysiological experiments and the existing literature. Finally, we will use the resulting model to show multifunctional control and illustrate how it can be used to make testable experimental predictions. 2 Prior models of Aplysia feeding and neural circuitry Feeding behavior in Aplysia is multifunctional and has been well characterized. Three key feeding behaviors are observed in the intact animal: biting, swallowing, and rejection. Animals flexibly switch between behaviors as sensory inputs vary, e.g., switching from biting to swallowing once food (seaweed) is successfully grasped. Moreover, as the animal encounters seaweeds that impose varying mechanical loads, the animal may robustly adjust the magnitude and duration of force it exerts to ingest the seaweed [53,97]. These multifunctional behaviors provide a model system for intelligent robotic grasper control. Previous models of the neural circuitry and peripheral mechanics have been reported that form the foundation for the hybrid Boolean model presented here, and we will briefly review the relevant aspects of these previous models. 2.1 Prior neural circuit analyses and models There is a wealth of information on the circuitry controlling feeding in the experimentally tractable Aplysia nervous system. The tractability is a result of several factors: there are relatively few neurons responsible for feeding behavior (on the order of 200 motor neurons and dozens of key interneurons [21,147]); neurons in Aplysia are large, pigmented, and have similar synaptic inputs, outputs, morphology and biophysical properties from one animal to the next, and can thus be identified as unique individuals [86]; the somata, which are the largest parts of the neurons, are electrically excitable and electrically compact, so that stimulating or inhibiting the neuron at the soma controls its outputs [31]. Together, these features make it possible to determine detailed neural circuitry that applies across all animals. In particular, the neural circuitry involved in Aplysia feeding has been extensively studied [33]. Two ganglia contain the primary neurons responsible for generating the relevant multifunctional behavior: the cerebral and buccal ganglia. The buccal ganglion contains many of the primary motor neurons that innervate Webster-Wood et al. Page 5 Biol Cybern. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 October 25. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript the musculature of the feeding apparatus, as well as interneurons and sensory neurons involved in feeding [33]. The cerebral ganglion is the primary locus for many key interneurons responsible for guiding behavioral switching [33]. Many of the neurons of the feeding circuitry can be consistently identified between animals due to their location, size, and electrical characteristics [26,28,74,84,146,154,159]. In particular, many of the motor neurons innervating key muscles have been previously identified, including B3/B6/B9 innervation of the I3 retractor muscle [29,30], B31/B32/B61/B62 innervation of the I2 protractor muscle [72], B7 innervation of the hinge retractor [164], B8a/b innervation of the grasper [29,47,111], and B38 activation of the anterior region of the I3 retractor muscle [30]. The coordination of these motor outputs is mediated via many known interneurons both in the buccal and cerebral ganglia [33]. The neural circuitry controlling feeding in isolation from the musculature that mediates feeding has been modeled in detail. Cataldo et al. [22] developed a network model with Hodgkin–Huxley-type neurons incorporating known data on conductances and the roles of important second messengers in individual identified neurons mediating feeding behavior (using the SNNAP modeling platform [170]) which has been recently updated by Costa et al. [32]. Figure 1A shows details of the neural circuitry included in this model. This model includes key motor neurons and interneurons in the buccal ganglia. Using this approach, they were able to generate ingestion-like and rejection-like neural activity. However, the model did not take into account the role of many relevant cerebral–buccal interneurons (CBIs) in switching between the behaviors and thus could not differentiate between bitelike and swallow-like patterns, nor did it provide control of a simulated periphery, and thus could not incorporate sensory feedback during feeding, which we have argued may play a critical role in generating robust feeding behavior [97,137]. Alternative conceptual models have included a wider assortment of CBIs (Fig. 1B), such as the circuits proposed by Jing et al. [79-83], in which the CBIs involved in switching from ingestive to egestive behavior, as well as from biting to swallowing, are included (Fig. 1C). These models highlight the importance of the CBIs in behavioral multifunctionality, 