JOURNALOF NEUROPHYSIOLO(;Y Vol. 66, No. 6, Dcccmber 199 1. Pri~td Fictive Motor Patterns in Chronic Spinal Cats K. G. PEARSON AND S. ROSSIGNOL Centre de Recherche en Sciences Neurologiques, Department of Physiology, Universite’ de Montrkal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS I. Fictive motor patterns were recorded in hind leg nerves of 10 adult chronic spinal cats (spinalized at T 13). Four of these animals had been trained to step with their hind legs on a treadmill (late- spinal animals), whereas the remainder received no training and were examined a short time after spinalization (early-spinal ani- mals). 2. A fictive pattern resembling the locomotor pattern for step- ping was evoked in all animals in response to stimulation of the skin of the perineal region. (2-[2,6-Dichloroanilinel-2-imidazo- 1ine)hydrochloride (Clonidine) at doses ranging from 100 to 500 pg/kg iv facilitated the production of this pattern, particularly in early-spinal animals. 3. The fictive locomotor pattern in late-spinal animals was more complex than that occurring in early-spinal animals. In the latter the pattern consisted of an alternation of activity in flexor and extensor nerves, and changing leg position did not qualita- tively alter the pattern, whereas in late-spinal animals the relative durations of the bursts in different flexors were usually not the same, and the pattern of flexor activity was dependent on leg posi- tion. 4. Moving the legs from extension to flexion progressively de- creased the duration of flexor bursts, increased the cycle period, and decreased the ease with which the pattern could be evoked in both early- and late-spinal animals. 5. 1 -P-3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA)/Isonocotinic acid 2-[(2-benzylcarbamoyl)ethyl]hydrazide(Nialamide) treatment fol- lowing Clonidine in early-spinal animals increased the complexity of flexor burst activity. This, and other observations, indicates that DOPA and Clonidine do not have strictly identical actions on the locomotor pattern generator. 6. Stimulation of the paws in late-spinal animals produced two patterns of activity distinctly different from the locomotor pat- tern. One was a short sequence of high-frequency rhythmic activ- ity (at ~8 c/s) in response to gently stimulating one paw with a water jet, and the other was a slow rhythm in flexor nerves in response to squeezing the paw. 7. The main conclusion of this investigation is that three dis- tinctly different fictive motor patterns can be generated in chronic spinal cats depending on the method and site of stimulation. These patterns correspond to three different behaviors (locomo- tion, paw shake, and rhythmic leg flexion) that can be elicited in behaving chronic spinal cats in response to the same stimuli. We also conclude that the alteration in the locomotor pattern that occurs during recovery of hind leg stepping in chronic spinal cats is in part due to alterations in the properties of the central rhythm- generating network. INTRODUCTION Adult cats spinalized at T 13 can regain the ability to step with their hind legs on a treadmill, especially when they are properly exercised (Barbeau and Rossignol 1987; Lovely et al. 1985; Rossignol et al. 1982). Initially the pattern of mo- tor activity in hind leg muscles is weak and poorly orga- nized, but as recovery progresses the motor pattern evolves to resemble that occurring in normal walking animals ( Barbeau and Rossignol 1987; B&anger et al. 1988; Rossig- no1 et al. 1989). During the recovery phase (lasting from 2 to 4 wk) the animal regains plantar foot contact, weight support, and nearly full angular excursions of all joints. At about the same time that stepping has recovered, other rhythmic behaviors can also be elicited, such as air stepping (Giuliani and Smith 1985 ), fast paw shaking [appearing as soon as 48 h posttransection according to Sabin and Smith ( 1984)], and strong flexions in response to squeezing a paw (unpublished observations). Two questions arising from these observations are the following: I ) is the progressive recovery of locomotion reflected in the characteristics of fictive motor patterns generated at different times after spinalization; and 2) can different motor patterns corre- sponding to the different rhythmic behaviors be elicited in immobilized animals? To gain information related to these questions, we have recorded the fictive motor patterns in hind leg muscle nerves in adult cats that were spinalized at T13 either a few days or a few weeks earlier. Animals in the latter group were trained to step with their hind legs on a treadmill and had regained the ability to produce fast paw shakes when the paw was dipped in water and rhythmic flexions of the limb when the paw was squeezed. Another objective of this investigation was to examine the action of the alpha-2 noradrenergic agonist (2-[2,6- Dichloroanilinel-2-imidazoline)hydrochloride (Clonidine) (Anden et al. 1970) on the fictive motor pattern in chronic spinal animals. Clonidine has been shown to initiate step- ping in acute spinal animals (Forssberg and Grillner 1973) and modulate stepping in chronic spinal animals (Barbeau et al. 1987). It also abolishes fast paw shaking in chronic spinal animals (Barbeau et al. 1987). Some specific ques- tions we wished to address were as follows: I) can fictive motor patterns related to stepping be elicited reliably when Clonidine is administered a few days after spinalization; 2) what is the effect of Clonidine on the fictive patterns gener- ated in animals that have regained the ability to step with their hind legs on a treadmill; and 3) are the fictive patterns that are generated after the administration of Clonidine the same as those produced by 1 -P-3,4-Dihydroxyphenylala- nine (L-DOPA)? METHODS Preparation of spinal animals The procedure for spinalization and care of the animals were similar to that described by Barbeau and Rossignol ( 1987). Adult 1874 0022~3077/9 1 $1 SO Copyright 63 199 1 The American Physiological Society Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn at Portland State Univ (131.252.218.064) on February 23, 2021. MOTOR PATTERNS IN SPINAL CATS 1875 cats were anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium (Somnotol, 40 mg/ kg), and, under aseptic conditions, the spinal cord was tran- sected at T 13. A urethral catheter was inserted to allow voiding of urine during the first few days after spinalization. Penicillin G ( 300,000 IU ) was administered each day for a fortnight or up to the time of the experimental procedure, whichever was sooner. Fluid and nutritional needs were provided for the first 3 days by subcutaneous injections of 15 ml of a mixture of essential amino acids, B-complex vitamins, and electrolytes (Aminolean, Pharma- centique, Cambridge, Ontario, Canada) in 100 ml lactated Ringer each day. After removal of the urethral catheter, the bladder was emptied twice a day. The animals were caged individually with free access to food and water. Training of spinal animals . Four animals were trained to step with their hind legs on a treadmill. Training commenced 2 days after spinalization. Each training session lasted - 15 min, and one or two sessions were given daily. The cat was held above a treadmill (speed range, O.l- 0.8 m/s) with its forelegs standing on a platform 3 cm above the treadmill belt. Initially feeble rhythmic hind leg movements were induced by perineal stimulation. Within a week the animals devel- oped good extensor tone and were able to support their weight. Stepping in response to perineal stimulation improved rapidly after this. Bilaterally coordinated stepping with complete weight support of the hindquarters occurred between 2 to 4 wk after spin- alization. The quality of stepping, judged by visual observation, varied over time, but in all four animals it was rated as good (periods of regular stepping for > 10 s with the 2 hind legs alternat- ing with complete weight support and plantar foot contact) at the time of the experimental procedure. Recording offictive motor patterns Ten spinal animals (4 trained and 6 untrained) were used to record the fictive motor patterns. Each animal was anesthetized with a short-lasting steroid anesthetic (Saffan, 1 ml/ kg, a mixture of 9 mg of alphaxalone and 3 mg of alphadolone per ml) and decerebrated by ligating the carotid arteries and either transecting the brain stem or ligating the basilar artery. The latter procedure produced an anemic decerebration (Pollock and Davis 1923). The effectiveness of this procedure was confirmed by examination of the brain at the end of the experiment. A tracheal cannula was inserted, and cannulas were inserted into a jugular vein and a carotid artery to allow the administration of drugs and for moni- toring blood pressure, respectively. To record electroneurograms ( ENGs), electrodes were attached to the cut ends of nerves innervating a variety of muscles in both hind legs. Each nerve was exposed and cut close to its insertion into the muscle. A single silver wire (insulated except for -5 mm at the end) was crimped onto the cut end of the nerve, and the uninsulated region of the electrode and - 1 cm of nerve was em- bedded in silicone-based impression material (Reprosil Light Body, De Trey). This material provided excellent insulation around the nerve and recording electrode. A single indifferent electrode was sewn into a thigh muscle. The skin incisions were closed, and the flexible recording leads ( -50 cm in length) were bundled together and coupled to differential amplifiers. This re- cording technique allowed the hind legs to be moved over their entire range while maintaining the recordings from the motor nerves. After attachment of the recording electrodes to nerves, the ani- mal was mounted with its head fixed in a stereotaxic holder and its body suspended so as to permit full passive movements of the hind legs. The animals were then immobilized with gallamine triethio- dide ( Flaxedil; initially 10 mg/ kg and supplemented as required) and artificially ventilated. A period of -5 h was allowed for recov- ery from the anesthetic. Before the administration of any drugs (see below) and after the recovery from the anesthetic, an attempt was made in all animals to elicit fictive motor patterns. A variety of stimulation sites was tried. The most common was to pinch the skin of the perineal region. In late-spinal animals (i.e., those that had been trained to step with their hind legs) relatively modest stimuli initiated rhyth- mic motor activity. A more intense stimulus was required in early- spinal animals. Other stimuli consisted of squeezing the paws, pinching the skin of the belly and thighs, gently rubbing the fur on the paws, and squirting a jet of water on the paws. The latter two methods of stimulation were used in attempts to elicit fictive pat- terns associated with paw shaking. The stimulus duration was usually <5 s, and at least 30 s separated consecutive stimuli. After the recording of fictive motor patterns in the absence of any drug, Clonidine was administered intravenously. Dosages were usually increased in units of 100 pg/ kg to a maximum of 500 pg/kg until good rhythmic activity could be elicited by pinching the perineum. The effects of 4-aminopyridine (4-AP, 300-600 pg/ kg) and isonocotinic acid 2-[(2-benzylcarbamoyl)ethyl]hydra- zide (Nialamide, 50 mg/kg) and L-DOPA (80 mg/kg) on the rhythmic patterns were also examined. Electrophysiological data were recorded on magnetic tape and subsequently displayed on a chart record with the use of a Gould ES 1000 electrostatic recorder. Measurements of burst duration, phase relationships and cycle periods were made from these chart recordings and from digitized data with the use of a PDP 11/34 computing facility. In brief, the ENG signals of interest were digi- tized at 1 kHz, and the bursts were selected by the use of an inter- active software (Zomlefer et al. 1984). In some cases (cf. Fig. 6) the ENG activity was rectified and integrated by summing the contents of all I-ms bins for the duration of each burst. In Figs. 8- 10 the activity was averaged in up to eight channels for several cycles by triggering the averaging on the onset of activity in one of the channels. RESULTS Previous work on the recovery of stepping in chronic spinal cats has demonstrated a progressive change in the motor pattern after spinalization (Barbeau and Rossignol 1987, 199 1; Belanger et al. 1988; Rossignol et al. 1989). The initial objective of this study was to determine whether a corresponding change also occurs in the fictive motor pat- tern recorded in immobilized animals. The RESULTS de- scribe first the fictive patterns generated in animals soon after spinalization ( referred to as early-spinal), and second, compares these patterns with those generated in animals that had been trained to step with their hind legs and had regained full weight support (referred to as late-spinal). The third section describes the modulation of these loco- motor patterns by drugs and leg position in both early- and late-spinal animals. Finally, the last section documents other rhythmic patterns evoked by various kinds of paw stimulation. Fictive locomotor pattern in early-spinal animals ENGs were made in six immobilized early-spinal ani- mals that had not been trained to step with their hind legs. These experiments were performed in one cat the first day postspinalization, in three cats on the third day, and in one cat on the sixth day. The sixth animal, spinalized for 16 days, was included in the early-spinal group because it had Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn at Portland State Univ (131.252.218.064) on February 23, 2021. 1876 K. G. PEARSON AND S. ROSSIGNOL not been trained to step and the data were similar to the other five animals. After immobilization, it was difficult to elicit rhythmic motor activity in response to gentle stimula- tion of the skin of the perineal region, and no rhythmic activity was elicited in response to stimulating the abdo- men, legs, or paws. Nevertheless, in all animals rhythmic bursts were evoked by intense perineal stimulation. The duration of these rhythmic sequences was short ((5 s), and only rarely were more than a few cycles produced. The diffi- culty of eliciting rhythmic motor activity, together with the weak and unsustained patterns of activity, prevented us from making any quantitative assessment of the fictive mo- tor patterns in early-spinal animals in the absence of drugs. Even so, three features were consistently observed: 1) rhythmic burst activity occurred in motor nerves to both hind legs, 2) the bursts in homonymous motor nerves in the two legs occurred in antiphase, and S) for each leg there was a strong reciprocity of the flexor and extensor bursts. Basi- cally, therefore, the fictive motor pattern in early-spinal an- imals consisted of a reciprocity between bursts of activity in flexor and extensor nerves. This pattern corresponds to the electromyographic (EMG) pattern recorded during the early stages of recovery of stepping in chronic spinal cats ( Barbeau and Rossignol 1987). One of the main objectives of this investigation was to determine whether the alpha-2 noradrenergic agonist Cloni- dine could facilitate the production of fictive motor pat- terns. This was considered likely because Clonidine has been shown to initiate stepping in acute spinal cats (Forss- berg and Grillner 1973) and to potentiate stepping in the hind legs of chronic spinal cats (Barbeau et al. 1987). As expected, Clonidine when administered intravenously in concentrations ranging from 100 to 500 pg/ kg greatly in- creased the ease with which fictive motor patterns could be generated in response to pinching the skin of the perineum. This facilitating effect was manifested by more intense bursts of activity and more sustained sequences of activity that lasted for tens of seconds. Furthermore, a subjective observation was that the intensity of the skin stimulus neces- sary to elicit rhythmic activity was reduced after the admin- istration of Clonidine. In immobilized early-spinal animals, rhythmic activity was generally not observed to occur spon- taneously with Clonidine in absence of some stimulation of the perineum or other skin regions. Because of the general lack of rhythmic activity in the absence of Clonidine in early-spinal animals, it was difficult to establish whether or not Clonidine altered the character- istics of the fictive pattern. Nonetheless, in two animals, sufficiently strong rhythmic sequences were produced be- fore the administration of Clonidine to allow a comparison. It was clear in these two animals that Clonidine did not modify the pattern of flexor activity in any obvious man- ner. This point will be made more clearly in late-spinal animals in which a detailed comparison of the pre- and post-Clonidine rhythmic patterns was possible (next sec- tion). Thus, after Clonidine administration, fictive activity in response to perineal stimulation always alternated be- tween the two legs, and flexor and extensor nerves in each leg were activated reciprocally with the extensor activity being generally longer in duration than the flexor activity (Fig. 1). As shown in Fig. 1 for two different cats, in all animals the onset of activity in semitendinosus (St) and anterior sartorius (Sart) was virtually synchronous, and the durations of the bursts in these two nerves were almost the same. We never observed sequences of activity in which St discharges a brief burst close to the onset of longer burst in Sart, or vice versa, as will be described later. We have not observed either double burst of activity in St or Sart. The only departure from synchronous burst activity in the flex- ors we encountered was that the onset of activity in tibialis anterior (TA) was usually delayed slightly relative to the onset of activity in St and Sart. The termination of activity in all flexors we recorded occurred almost synchronously. In five of the six early-spinal Clonidine-treated animals, the durations of the flexor bursts, and the frequencies of the fictive rhythms, were comparable with those occurring in walking animals ( ranges 200-500 ms and 0.5-2 c/s, respec- tively; Fig. 2). In the remaining animal, the frequency was low ( -0.3 c/s) , and the flexor bursts were long ( - 1,000 ms). However, these values corresponded to those expected by extending the values for frequency and duration in the other five cats. Therefore, although the frequency was low in this animal, there was no indication that a different mech- anism was responsible for the generation of the rhythm. Another consistent feature in all animals was that the flexor burst durations increased with an increase in cycle period (Fig. 2). However, this dependency of flexor burst duration was not strong, and it was similar to that in intact treadmill- walking animals (Fig. 2B, dashed line). As is well known from previous work in stepping intact, decerebrate, and spi- nal animals, the changes in cycle period were mainly asso- ciated with changes in the duration of extensor bursts (not illustrated). Fictive locomotor pattern in late-spinal animals Figure 3 ( reft ) shows an example of a fictive pattern re- corded from hind leg nerves in a late-spinal cat. This record was obtained in response to pinching the skin of the peri- neal region and in the absence of any drug treatment. The basic features of this fictive pattern are similar to those ob- served in early-spinal animals in that rhythmic activity was produced bilaterally and in each leg there was a strong reci- procity of the flexor and extensor bursts, with the period of extensor activity being of longer duration than that in the flexor nerves. This basic pattern of activity was observed in all four late-spinal animals. However, a major difference as compared with early-spinal animals was that the durations of the bursts in the 