Effects of Ankle and Hip Muscle Afferent Inputs on Rhythm Generation During Fictive Locomotion Alain Frigon, Jennifer Sirois, and Jean-Pierre Gossard Groupe de Recherche sur le Syste`me Nerveux Central des Fonds de la Recherche en Sante ´ du Que´bec, De´partement de Physiologie, Universite´ de Montre´al, Montre´al, Que´bec, Canada Submitted 23 November 2009; accepted in ﬁnal form 20 January 2010 Frigon A, Sirois J, Gossard JP. Effects of ankle and hip muscle afferent inputs on rhythm generation during ﬁctive locomotion. J Neurophysiol 103: 1591–1605, 2010. First published January 20, 2010; doi:10.1152/jn.01028.2009. Hip position and loading of limb extensors are major sensory cues for the initiation and duration of different phases during walking. Although these inputs have pathways projecting to the locomotor rhythm generator, their effects may vary in different parts of the locomotor cycle. In the present study, the plantaris (Pl), sartorius (Sart), rectus femoris (RF), and caudal gluteal (cGlu) nerves were stimulated at group I and/or group II strength during spontaneous ﬁctive locomotion in 16 adult decerebrate cats. These nerves supply muscles that extend the ankle (Pl), ﬂex the hip (Sart, RF), or extend the hip (cGlu). Stimuli were given at six epochs of the locomotor cycle to evaluate when they access the rhythm generator. Group I afferents from Pl nerve always reset the locomotor rhythm; stimulation during extension prolonged cycle period and extension phase duration, while stimulation during ﬂexion terminated ﬂexion and initiated extension. On the other hand, stimulating RF and cGlu nerves only produced signiﬁcant effects on the rhythm in precise epochs, particularly during mid-ﬂexion and/or mid- to late extension. Stimulating the Sart nerve produced complex effects on the rhythm that were not distributed evenly to all extensor motor pools. The most consistent effect was reduced ﬂexion phase duration with stimulation during ﬂexion, particularly at group II strength, and prolongation of the extension phase but only in late extension. That hip muscle afferents reset the rhythm in only speciﬁc epochs of the locomotor cycle suggests that the rhythm generator operates with several subdi- visions to determine phase and cycle durations. INTRODUCTION During walking, the basic activation of limb muscles and the alternation between swing and stance phases is mediated by the spinal central pattern generator (CPG) for locomotion (re- viewed in Delcomyn 1980; Grillner 1981; McCrea and Rybak 2008; Rossignol 1996). Although phase transitions are con- trolled centrally, during normal walking inputs from multiple sources interact with the CPG, adjusting phase transitions, phase durations, and cycle period (reviewed in Pearson 2008; Rossignol et al. 2006). In particular, load-related sensory feedback from limb extensors and inputs from hip muscles are thought to be important in regulating the locomotor rhythm (reviewed in Dietz et al. 2002; Duysens et al. 2000; McVea et al. 2005; Pearson 2008; Rossignol et al. 2006). For example, stimulating ankle extensor nerves at group I strength during ﬁctive locomotion can abruptly transition the locomotor cycle from ﬂexion to extension or prolong ongoing extension (Con- way et al. 1987; Gossard et al. 1994; Guertin et al. 1995; Schomburg et al. 1998) and therefore reset the locomotor rhythm (Hultborn et al. 1998). This action was found to be mediated mainly by group Ib ﬁbers from triceps surae muscles via polysynaptic excitatory pathways to all limb extensors (Gossard et al. 1994). Subsequent studies showed that group I afferents from every ankle extensor were equally effective in resetting the rhythm during ﬁctive locomotion induced by stimulating the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) (Guer- tin et al. 1995). However, in decerebrate cats walking on a treadmill, stimulating the lateral gastrocnemius and soleus was more effective than stimulating other nerves (Whelan et al. 1995). Sinusoidal stretches of ankle extensors also entrain the locomotor rhythm (Conway et al. 1987). Resetting the rhythm or entrainment, is generally taken as evidence that inputs access the rhythm-generating circuitry (Conway et al. 1987; Gossard and Hultborn 1991; Gossard et al. 1994; Hultborn et al. 1998; Kriellaars et al. 1994; McCrea 1998; Pearson et al. 1998; Schomburg et al. 1998). Imposed movements at the hip also entrain the locomotor rhythm, indicating that hip muscle afferents also access the rhythm generator (Andersson and Grillner 1983; Kriellaars et al. 1994). A progressive denervation of the hip musculature revealed that as few as two intrinsic hip muscles were sufﬁcient to entrain the rhythm but that convergence of multiple muscle afferents was more effective (Kriellaars et al. 1994). Other studies showed that group I and II afferents from different hip muscles could reset the locomotor rhythm (Lam and Pearson 2001, 2002; Perreault et al. 1995; Stecina et al. 2005). It was also found that signals from the sartorius muscle, a biarticular muscle with hip ﬂexor torque, were of particular importance for the transition between stance and swing (Lam and Pearson 2001). However, the effects of stimulating the sartorius nerve at group I or II strength were quite variable from one experi- ment to another during ﬁctive locomotion as well as between preparations (Perreault et al. 1995; Schomburg et al. 1998; Stecina et al. 2005). Although there are clear differences and variations in the efﬁcacy of muscle afferents to affect the locomotor rhythm, the reasons are unclear. We know that the transmission of sensory inputs in spinal pathways is modulated according to the phase of locomotion (Forssberg et al. 1975; McCrea 2001; Rossignol et al. 2006). In some cases, the modulation is quite speciﬁc with maximum and minimum reﬂex responses occurring in speciﬁc subdivi- sions (i.e., epochs) of the locomotor cycle (Burke et al. 2001; Lennard and Hermanson 1985). This suggests that the loco- motor CPG exerts precise temporal gating of sensory inputs Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: J. P. Gossard, Pav. Paul-G.-Desmarais, 2960, Chemin de la Tour, De ´partement de Physiologie, Faculte´d eM e ´decine, Universite ´ de Montre ´al, Montre ´al, Que ´bec H3T 1J4, Canada. J Neurophysiol 103: 1591–1605, 2010. First published January 20, 2010; doi:10.1152/jn.01028.2009. 15910022-3077/10 $8.00 Copyright © 2010 The American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. that do not perturb the ongoing rhythm. However, whether the CPG exerts such modulation for sensory inputs that can reset the rhythm is unknown. Evaluating the effects of key sensory inputs during normal walking is difﬁcult because the locomotor CPG is constantly receiving inputs from all four limbs and from supraspinal pathways. However, in animal preparations where movement-related sensory feedback is abolished (i.e., by paralyzing the animal), it is possible to isolate interactions between speciﬁc sensory inputs and the locomotor program (i.e., ﬁctive locomotion) by recording and stimulating periph- eral nerves. In the present study, the role of selected afferent inputs in adjusting the locomotor rhythm at different time points across the cycle was evaluated by quantifying changes in cycle period, phase durations, and phase transitions during ﬁctive locomotion. Results show that effects on the locomotor rhythm depended on speciﬁc muscle afferents and on the timing of the stimulation within the locomotor cycle. METHODS Ethical information, animal care, and surgical procedures All procedures were in accordance with the Guide for Care and Use of Experimental Animals (Canada) and approved by the Ethics Com- mittee of the Universite´ de Montre ´al. All animals were obtained from a designated breeding establishment for scientiﬁc research. Before the experiments, animals were housed and fed within designated areas, which are monitored daily by veterinarians and trained personnel. Data were compiled from 16 adult cats weighing between 2.5 and 4.5 kg. Prior to surgery, cats were injected with an analgesic (Anafen, 2 mg/kg sc) and premedicated (Atravet, 0.1 mg/kg im; glycopyrrolate, 0.01 mg/kg im; ketamine, 10.0 mg/kg im). Cats were then anesthe- tized with a mask using a mixture of oxygen ( /H1101150%), nitrous oxide (/H1101150%) and isoﬂurane (2– 4%, Abbott Laboratories, Montreal, Que- bec, Canada). Once the animal was deeply anesthetized (10 –15 min), a tracheotomy was performed and cats were intubated to provide the anesthesia. The right common carotid artery was cannulated to mon- itor blood pressure, and the right jugular and cephalic veins were cannulated for ﬂuid administration. The level of anesthesia was conﬁrmed and adjusted throughout the surgery by monitoring blood pressure, applying pressure to the paw to detect limb withdrawal, and verifying the size and reactivity of the pupils. Selected hindlimb nerves were dissected free from surrounding tissue and a laminectomy was performed to expose spinal segments from L 6 to L 3. Following a craniotomy, the cortex was removed and all tissue rostral to the colliculi and mammillary bodies was removed (i.e., a precollicular/premammillary decerebration). At this point, animals are considered to have complete lack of sentience. Anesthesia was discontinued and animals were paralyzed with an injection (1 mg/kg) of pancuronium bromide (Sandoz Canada, Quebec, Canada) through the right jugular or cephalic veins. Paralysis is required to remove movement-related sensory feedback to study the centrally generated pattern of locomotion (i.e., “ﬁctive” locomotion). Immedi- ately after this injection, the animals were artiﬁcially ventilated for the duration of the experiment. An identical injection of pancuronium bromide was administered every 45 min until the end of the experi- ment. Hindlimb nerves were mounted on bipolar hook electrodes, and using the skin ﬂaps to make an inverted parachute, the nerves were bathed in parafﬁn oil. A lethal injection of pentobarbital anesthetic was administered at the end of the experiment through the right jugular or cephalic veins. Fictive locomotion, nerve recording, and stimulation A spontaneous ﬁctive locomotor rhythm is frequently observed (/H1102250%) after a precollicular/premammillary decerebration. Manually stimulating the neck region and/or pinna or short series of electrical trains of stimuli to the sciatic nerve were sometimes used to initiate episodes of ﬁctive locomotion, which could last for several minutes and hours in some cases. To monitor locomotor episodes, electroneurography (ENG) of se- lected muscle nerves of the left hindlimb was performed by dissecting and mounting the following nerves on bipolar silver-chloride elec- trodes: posterior biceps-semitendinosus (PBSt), semimembranosus- anterior biceps (SmAB), lateral gastrocnemius-soleus (LGS), medial gastrocnemius (MG), plantaris (Pl), ﬂexor hallucis longus/ﬂexor digi- torum longus (FDHL), tibialis anterior (TA), extensor digitorum longus (EDL), caudal gluteal nerve (cGlu), and sciatic nerve (uncut). The cutaneous superﬁcial peroneal (SP) nerve was mounted uncut. In some experiments, some peripheral muscle nerves such as MG, LGS, and FDHL were also left uncut. The cord dorsum potential (CDP) was recorded with a silver-chloride ball electrode and stimulation intensity was expressed as multiples of the threshold (T) for the most excitable ﬁbers in the nerve as determined by the ﬁrst negative deﬂection of the CDP. For nerve stimulations, the Pl and cGlu nerves were stimulated using bipolar hook electrodes, whereas cuff electrodes were placed around sartorius (Sart) and rectus femoris (RF) nerves in the inguinal region. The Pl nerve supplies the plantaris muscle, an ankle extensor. The Sart nerve supplies the sartorius muscle, which can ﬂex the hip and ﬂex or extend the knee. The RF nerve supplies the rectus femoris muscle, a hip ﬂexor/knee extensor, while the cGlu nerve supplies the gluteus maximus (hip extensor) and caudofemoralis (hip extensor/hip abductor) muscles. The Pl nerve was stimulated at 1.8 o r 2 T while Sart, RF, and cGlu nerves were stimulated at 2 an d 5 T with trains of stimuli (25 pulses of 0.5 ms at 200-Hz, 125-ms duration) every 2– 8 s during spontaneous ﬁctive locomotion. This stimulation duration was less than the duration of extensor activity during spontaneous ﬁctive locomotion and is comparable to the duration of afferent feedback that might occur during walking (Perreault et al. 1995). In a few experi- ments, trains of 100 –250 stimuli were used to study the effects of prolonged stimulation. During a locomotor episode, nerves were stimulated at ﬁxed intervals and were generally interspersed with other nerve stimulations. Due to spontaneous variations in burst durations and cycle period, trains of stimuli fell in different periods of the cycle. The interval of time between stimulations was adjusted to the cycle period (i.e., the “speed” of the locomotor rhythm) so that at least two to three locomotor cycles could be recorded between stimulations. This was done to provide control cycles and to prevent entrainment of the rhythm. ENG was band-pass ﬁltered (10 Hz to 10 kHz) and ampliﬁed. Episodes of ﬁctive locomotion were digitized on-line with interactive custom-made software (Spinal Cord Research Center, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada) or off-line from recordings on videotape (15 channels; Vetter 4000A; A.R. Vetter, Rebersburg, PA). Data were analyzed using the same custom-made software. The effects of stimulating muscle afferents from the iliopsoas, a prominent hip ﬂexor, were not investigated because obtaining viable nerve branches from this muscle during dissection is extremely difﬁcult. Moreover, sensory inputs from the iliopsoas were shown to have little effect on hip ﬂexor activity during treadmill or ﬁctive locomotion in decerebrate cats, contrary to inputs from Sart (Lam and Pearson 2001; Stecina et al. 2005). Data recording and analysis Overall, 120 episodes of spontaneous ﬁctive locomotion were ana- lyzed in 16 cats (1–21 episodes per cat) with trains of stimuli of 25 pulses. Table 1 summarizes the number of episodes per cat and the nerves 1592 A. FRIGON, J. SIROIS, AND J.-P. GOSSARD J Neurophysiol • VOL 103 • MARCH 2010 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. stimulated. An additional 15 episodes in six cats were recorded using prolonged stimulation (i.e., trains of 100 or 250 pulses). Only episodes with a stable locomotor rhythm, with small ﬂuctuations in cycle period (i.e., the SD of control cycle periods did not exceed 10% of the mean), in which the onset and offset of extensor and ﬂexor bursts could be clearly established, were retained for analysis. A locomotor episode was deﬁned as clear alternation between ﬂexor and extensor bursts for /H1135010 cycles. Episodes ranged from 11 to 478 cycles. Overall, the determination of onsets and offsets of 14,772 bursts was performed with a roughly equal proportion of extensor and ﬂexor bursts. Bursts durations from ﬂexor and extensor ENG were measured as the time between burst onset and termination from the raw ENG waveforms. Cycle period was deﬁned as the time between successive ﬂexor or extensor burst onsets in a given nerve. The ENG with the best signal-to- noise ratio was used to calculate phase duration and locomotor cycle period. Cycles without stimulation during a locomotor episode were used as control cycles (Fig. 1A) provided they did not follow a stimulated cycle. Cycle periods, ﬂexor and extensor burst durations from control locomotor cycles within an episode were averaged to provide control values. The number of values averaged for controls depended on the number of cycles within an episode. All cycles that ﬁt the criteria for control cycles within an episode were used, except for obvious outliers (i.e., bursts that were /H113501.5 times longer than other bursts). The ENG bursts from LGS, MG, or SmAB were used to calculate the duration of the extension phase and extensor cycle period (CPEXT) within an episode, whereas the ENG bursts from TA were used to calculate the duration of the ﬂexion phase and ﬂexor cycle period (CPFLEX). Within a given animal, the same ﬂexor and extensor nerves were used for all episodes. With Sart stimulation, it was important to use the ENG from SmAB because we found that Sart stimulation during extension could brieﬂy stop the ENG in LGS, MG, and Pl, while leaving SmAB ENG unchanged (see Fig. 3 A). Figure 1 B shows the different parameters measured. Phase durations and cycle periods were determined off-line with custom-made software (Spinal Cord Research Center, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada). Measuring both CP EXT and CP FLEX provides complementary information. For instance, with stimulation during ﬂexion, measuring CP EXT indicates whether the next extensor burst occurred sooner (i.e., phase advance), an indication of resetting of the rhythm from ﬂexion to extension. Similarly, with stimulation during extension, measuring CPFLEX indicates whether the next ﬂexor burst is phase advanced, which would be consistent with resetting of the rhythm from extension to ﬂexion. The locomotor cycle was divided into six bins (see Fig. 1 B). These bins will be referred to as “epochs of stimulation” to avoid confusion with subdivisions of locomotion previously deﬁned (Philippson 1905). The ﬂexion phase was divided into three epochs: early (EF), mid (MF)-, and late (LF) ﬂexion by dividing the ﬂexor burst in three equal parts. The extension phase was also divided into three epochs: early (EE), mid (ME)-, and late (LE) extension, by dividing the 1sec Pl 25p, 2T CDP PBSt (Flexor) SmAB (Extensor) EDL (Flexor) LGS (Extensor) TA (Flexor) 1sec CPEXT Extension CPFLEX Flexion A B EE ME LE EF LFMF CS CC LGS (Extensor) TA (Flexor) FIG. 1. Measures performed during ﬁctive locomotion with nerve stimula- tion. A: an episode of ﬁctive locomotion with stimulation of the plantaris (Pl) nerve during mid-extension. Cycles preceding the stimulated cycle ( S) were used as control cycles ( C). The number of control cycles depended on the number of cycles within an episode. For the shortest locomotor episodes (i.e., 11 cycles), 4 –5 control cycles were used, whereas for longer episodes, /H11022100 control cycles could be used. B: the electroneurography (ENG) from an extensor burst [e.g., lateral gastrocnemius-soleus (LGS)] was used to deter- mine extensor cycle period (CP EXT) and the duration of the extension phase. The extension phase was divided into 3 equal parts to determine the epoch of stimulation: early (EE), mid (ME)-, and late (LE) extension. The ENG from a ﬂexor burst [e.g., tibialis anterior (TA)] was used to determine cycle period (CPFLEX) and the duration of the ﬂexion phase. The ﬂexion phase was divided into 3 equal parts to determine the epoch of stimulation: early (EF), mid (MF)-, and late (LF) ﬂexion. TABLE 1. Number of episodes and the nerves stimulated for each cat Cat No. of Episodes Nerves Stimulated AF1 8 Pl, Sart, RF, cGlu AF2 11 Sart, RF, cGlu AF3 6 Pl, Sart, cGlu AF4 4 Pl, Sart, RF AF5 4 Sart, RF AF6 1 Pl, Sart AF7 5 Pl, Sart AF8 8 Pl, RF, cGlu AF9 7 Pl, Sart, cGlu AF10 21 Pl, Sart, RF, cGlu AF11 10 Pl, Sart AF12 2 RF, cGlu AF13 15 Pl, RF, cGlu AF14 2 Pl, Sart AF15 4 Sart AF16 12 RF Pl, plantaris; Sart, sartorius; RF, rectus femoris; cGlu, caudal gluteal nerve. 1593STIMULATING ANKLE OR HIP MUSCLE AFFERENTS DURING FICTIVE LOCOMOTION J Neurophysiol • VOL 103 • MARCH 2010 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. extensor burst in three equal parts. Cycles with nerve stimulation were classiﬁed into one of these six epochs. Stimulation onset determined the epoch. The epoch of stimulation was vis