The spinal cord in the cat contains circuitry (central pattern generator) capable of generating alternating flexion and extension activity for stereotypical limb movements such as walking (reviewed in Grillner, 1981). The circuitry can operate without any supraspinal input (Grillner, 1973) or peripheral sensory f eedback (Grillner & Zangger, 1974, 1984). Evidence is mounting for a spinal central pattern generator in humans (e. g. Calancie et al. 1994; Dimitrijevic et al. 1998). Moreover, there is ample evidence that the timing and the amplitude of the motor output from the spinal generator is greatly affected by a variety of peripheral sensory information (Rossignol, 1996). The sophisticated sensory control mechanism of loco motion contributes to the activation of muscles (Severin, 1970; Yang et al. 1991; Hiebert & Pearson, 1999; Sinkjaer et al. 2000), and allows the animal to respond to changes in the external environment (Forssberg et al. 1980). One particularly well studied aspect of the sensory control of walking is the control of the transition from the stance to the swing phase. Grillner & Rossignol (1978) found that preventing the hip from attaining an extended position in chronic spinal cats inhibits the ge neration of the flexor burst and hence the onset of swing phase. It was thus suggested that the hip position is important in initiating the stance to swing transition. Evidence consistent with this hypothesis was found in decerebrate cats, where the flexor burst was promoted and the extensor activity was shortened by stimulating Ia af ferents in the iliopsoas muscle using stretch and vibration (Hiebert et al. 1996). Furthermore, the initiation of the f ictive locomotor rhythm in decerebrate cats was reported to be easier when the legs were extended (Pearson & Rossignol, 1991). Entrainment of the locomotor rhythm was also obtained by using sinusoidal stretch of the iliopsoas muscle in non-immobilized decerebrate cats (Hiebert et al. 1996) or using rhythmic hip movements in immobilized spinal (Andersson et al. 1978; Andersson & Grillner, 1981, 1983) and decerebrate cats (Kriellaars et al. 1994). Apart from hip position, unloading of the extensor muscles in the limb may also be an important sensory signal involved in initiating the stance to swing transition. Duysens & Pearson (1980) found that a contraction force of more than 40 N in ankle extensors led to tonic activation of the extensors in that limb. Previous animal work showed Journal of Physiology (2000), 528.2 , pp. 389—404 389 The initiation of the swing phase in human infant stepping: importance of hip position and leg loading M a r c oY .C .P a n g and Jaynie F. Yang Department of Physical Therapy and Division of Neuroscience, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2G4 (Received 5 April 2000; accepted after revision 12 July 2000) 1. Hip extension and low load in the extensor muscles are important sensory signals that allow a decerebrate or spinal cat to advance from the stance phase to the swing phase during walking. We tested whether the same sensory information controlled the phases of stepping in human infants. 2. Twenty-two infants between the ages of 5 and 12 months were studied during supported stepping on a treadmill. Forces exerted by the lower limbs, surface electromyography (EMG) from muscles, and the right hip angle were recorded. The whole experimental session was videotaped. 3. The hip position and the amount of load experienced by the right limb were manipulated during stepping by changing the position of the foot during the stance phase or by applying manual pressure on the pelvic crest. Disturbances with dif ferent combinations of hip position and load were used. 4. The stance phase was prolonged and the swing phase delayed when the hip was flexed and the load on the limb was high. In contrast, stance phase was shortened and swing advanced when the hip was extended and the load was low . The results were remarkably similar to those in reduced preparations of the cat. They thus suggest that the behaviour of the brainstem and spinal circuitry for walking may be similar between human infants and cats. 5. There was an inverse relationship between hip position and load at the time of swing initiation, indicating the two factors combine to regulate the transition. 10933 Keywords: that stimulation of muscle nerves at a strength that recruits the Ib af ferents in the extensors during the extensor burst causes prolongation of extensor activity . This result was found in dif ferent preparations of the cat, including immobilized decerebrate (Gossard et al. 1994; McCrea et al. 1995), non-immobilized decerebrate (Whelan et al. 1995), immobilized spinal (Conway et al. 1987; Pearson & Collins, 1993; Gossard et al. 1994; McCrea et al. 1995) and non- immobilized spinal (Pearson et al. 1992; Pearson & Collins, 1993). Furthermore, mechanical loading of the extensors in walking decerebrate cats also produced similar ef fects (Hiebert & Pearson, 1999). It has been proposed that the decrease in positive feedback signals carried by the group Ib af ferents from the extensors at the end of stance phase allows for the subsequent ge neration of flexor activity. In contrast to the robust ef fects of hip position and load on walking in the cat, the ef fects on humans are less certain. The ef fects of hip position in human walking have not been studied. Loading, whether by electrical (Stephens & Yang, 1996) or mechanical (Stephens & Yang, 1999; Misiaszek et al. 2000) methods, produced weak ef fects in adult human subjects. It is possible that there is a fundamental dif ference between humans and cats in the way stance and swing phase are regulated. Alternatively , it is also possible that the dif ferences result from a dif ference between the state of the animal (i.e. healthy adult humans and decerebrate or spinal cats). There is some evidence to suggest that these ef fects are strongest in paralysed, spinal cats (Conway et al. 1987; Pearson & Collins, 1993; Gossard et al. 1994; McCrea et al. 1995) and weaker in the less reduced preparations (Whelan et al. 1995; Whelan & Pearson, 1997; Hiebert & Pearson, 1999). Perhaps these ef fects are a characteristic of the spinal circuitry , which is modif ied by the presence of supraspinal input (Whelan & Pearson, 1997; Hiebert & Pearson, 1999). The stepping response in human infants is thought to be mainly controlled by the brainstem and spinal circuitry (Peiper, 1961; Forssberg, 1985). Full myelination of the corticospinal tract does not occur until the age of 2 (Yakovlev & Lecours, 1967). Moreover, the threshold for eliciting muscle activity in the upper and lower extremities using transcranial magnetic stimulation is very high in children under the age of 2 (Koh & Eyre 1988; Eyre et al. 1991; Muller et al. 1991). Hence, it is reasonable to suggest that the brainstem and spinal circuitry involved in the stepping response in infants is subject to less cortical influence than in adults. Therefore, infants provide a good human model for studying the underlying behaviour of brainstem and spinal circuitry in response to the changes in sensory input. While the earlier studies have focused on the ef fect of either hip position or load, the relationship between the two factors is largely unknown. Hip position and load usually vary together such that the observed ef fects are dif f icult to attribute to one or the other factor. Thus, it is critical that the experiment be designed in such a way that would allow for separating the ef fects of hip position from those of load. Moreover, it is important to determine how dif ferent sensory inputs are combined to reach decisions for motor output. The present study examined how hip position and load af fected the initiation of the swing phase in infant stepping. Our hypothesis is that the hip position and the amount of load both play a role in regulating the stance to swing transition in infant stepping. We used a variety of hip disturbances that also allowed us to study the interaction between the change in hip position and loading. The results suggest that both hip position and load have powerful ef fects on modifying the step cycle in human infants. The two factors are combined to determine the stance to swing transition. The behaviour of the brainstem and spinal circuitry involved in the stepping response is strikingly similar to that in reduced preparations of the cat. METHODS Subjects The infants in this study were recruited through the maternity wards of the hospitals and the public health division of Capital Health in Edmonton, Alberta. All of the infants in this study were born at term. Ethical approval for this study was obtained through the Health Research Ethics Board, University of Alberta and the Capital Health Authority , Edmonton, Alberta. Twenty-two infants aged from 5 to 12 months (mean: 7·5 months) were studied. All of the infants studied could not walk independently . Approximately 2—3 weeks before the scheduled experimental session, the parent was asked whether the infant showed any stepping response. Only those infants who made six consecutive steps, as reported by the parent, were brought in for the experiment. The parent was instructed to practice stepping with the infants for 1—2 min daily until the date of the experiment (Yang et al. 1998 a) . Informed and written consent was obtained from the parent before the infant participated in the study . The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Recording procedures The skin was cleaned with alcohol swabs before applying the Beckman-type, bipolar (1 cm diameter, electrode separation of 1 cm) surface electromyographic (EMG) electrodes. For 10 of the 22 subjects, the electrodes were placed over four muscle groups in the right leg: (1) tibialis anterior (TA), (2) gastrocnemius—soleus (GS), (3) quadriceps (Q), and (4) hamstrings (HAMS). For the other 12 subjects, the four pairs of EMG electrodes were placed on the TA and GS on both legs. A twin-axis electrogoniometer (Penny and Giles, Biometrics, B lackwood, Gwent, UK) was placed over the right hip joint to assess the hip position during disturbed and undisturbed stepping. One arm of the goniometer was in line with the mid-axillary line of the trunk and the other with the longitudinal axis of the right femur pointing toward the lateral epicondyle. A video camera (Panasonic PV-950) recorded the movement of the left side of the infant. In o rder to identify the key landmarks on video, adhesive skin markers were placed over the superior border of the iliac spine, the greater trochanter, the knee joint line and the lateral malleolus of the left leg. A Gaitway treadmill system (Kistler Instrument Corp., Amherst, NY, USA) was used for each experiment. Two force plates located beneath the treadmill belt one in front of the other were used to measure vertical ground reaction forces during walking. Each subject was weighed by sitting the infant on one of the force plates. M. Y . C. Pang and J. F. Yang J. Physiol. 528.2390 To elicit walking, a resear cher held the infant under the a rms, with one hand on each side of the infant’s upper trunk. The resear cher attempted to hold the infant in a stationary position over the treadmill without imposing any movements on the infant. The infant was allowed to support as much as possible of its own weight and was centred on the treadmill at the junction of the two force plates. An accurate measurement of load on the limb at swing initiation during undisturbed stepping can be obtained by examining the rear force plate signals (for details regarding the interpretation of the force plate signals, see Fig. 1). The speed of the treadmill was adjusted so that optimal stepping responses could be obtained. Several trials of tr eadmill walking were conducted for each infant. The entire experiment was videotaped. Electromyography , force plate and electrogoniometer signals were amplif ied and recorded on VHS tape with a pulse code modulation encoder (A.R. V etter, Rebersburg, P A, USA). The video and analog signals were synchronized by a digital counter at a rate of 1 Hz. T h ee x p e r i m e n tw a sa p p r o x i m a t e l y1hl o n gf o re a c hi n f a n t . Hip disturbances Four types of disturbances were employed to study the ef fects of hip position and load on the initiation of swing: (1) backward disturbance, which extends the hip and decreases the load, (2) mid- disturbance, which keeps the hip in a slightly flexed or neutral position and the load remains high, (3) forward disturbance, which flexes the hip and decreases the load and (4) loading, which increases the load as the hip extends in the late stance phase. The four disturbances ge nerated different combinations of hip position and load, so that the relationship between the two factors could be examined by comparing the responses to dif ferent disturbances. All the disturbances were applied after good, sustained stepping was obtained. Initiation of swing phase in inf ant steppingJ. Physiol. 528.2 391 Figure 1. The force plate signals in relation to the step cycle Top, schematic illustration of the infant at three instances in the step cycle. Note that the infant was pl aced on the treadmill, at the junction between the front and the rear force plate. Bottom, the corresponding force plate (FP) signals are shown with the three instances in time indicated by the vertical dashed lines. The letters L and R under the front plate signal indicate the time of left and right foot contact, respectively . The L and R under the rear force plate indicate the time each foot slides onto the rear force plate. A, the right foot has made contact with the front force plate (note the corresponding rise in front force plate signal). The left leg is in late stance and its force is registered by the rear force plate (note the fall in rear force plate signal). B, the right leg is in the mid-stance phase. The force of the right leg is registered by the front and rear force plates (see the fall in front force plate signal and the rise in rear force plate signal). Meanwhile, the left foot is in swing phase, and does not contribute to any of the force plate signals. C, the right leg is in late stance and its force is registered by the rear force plate (see the fall in rear force plate signal). The left foot has made contact with the front force plate, causing a rise in the front force plate signal. The f irst three types of disturbances altered the foot position on the treadmill by placing a piece of cardboard under the right foot. Because the cardboard can slide against the treadmill belt, the position of the foot, and hence the whole leg, could be manipulated by pulling on the cardboard. The cardboard was always removed immediately after the disturbance, and undisturbed stepping continued. Backward disturbance ( Fig. 2 A) . Typically , the cardboard was placed on the treadmill during the swing phase on the right. At the end of the swing phase, the right foot came into contact with the cardboard. At this time or slightly later, one of the experimenters disturbed the limb by pulling on the cardboard in a backward direction faster than the speed of the treadmill belt. This accelerated the limb toward hip extension and also decreased the load. Mid-disturbance ( Fig. 2 B) . As the right foot stepped onto the cardboard, the experimenter maintained the right limb in a mid- stance position. As a result, the hip joint was slightly flexed or neutral and the load was relatively high during the disturbance. The disturbance was longer, because we wished to determine whether stepping could be prevented on one side while the other side continued stepping. Forward disturbance ( Fig. 2 C) . The experimenter drew the cardboard slightly forward in order to flex the hip. As the hip was being flexed, the load on the limb was decreased simultaneously because of the forward movement. Loading ( Fig. 2 D) . As the right limb approached late stance, extra load was added to the limb by briefly applying manual pressure downward on the superior iliac crest of the pelvis. Ef fort was made so that no observable hip flexion occurred as a result of the disturbance. Data analysis The data were analysed of f-line. The EMG data were high pass f iltered at 10 Hz, full-wave rectif ied and low pass f iltered at 30 Hz. The force plate and the electrogoniometer signals were also low pass f iltered at 30 Hz. All the signals were then AÏD converted at 250 Hz (Axoscope 7, Axon Instruments, Foster City , CA, USA). The video record was reviewed in detail to identify good sequences of walking and successful disturbances. The corresponding analog data were then identif ied. Sustained, undisturbed stepping was def ined as four consecutive and alternating steps. All the undisturbed steps for each subject were selected and averaged using a custom written software program. The front and rear force plate signals during the averaged step cycle were then summed at each point in time, and the mean value over the cycle determined. This gave an estimate of how much weight the infant was bearing during stepping. The disturbance was included in the analysis only if (1) it was preceded and followed by a good step, and (2) it succeeded in disturbing the limb as described under ‘hip disturbances’. The step cycle and swing durations of the undisturbed and disturbed steps were estimated by the time of right foot contact and toe of f, M. Y . C. Pang and J. F. Yang J. Physiol. 528.2392 Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the dist urbances A, backward disturbance. A piece of cardboard was placed on the treadmill during the right swing phase. Immediately after the right foot came into contact with the cardboard, the hip was pulled toward extension by drawing the cardboard backward. The load on the limb was reduced as a result. B, mid- disturbance. The limb was maintained in a mid-stance position by keeping the cardboard stationary under the body . The load remained high. C, forward disturbance. The hip was pulled toward flexion by drawing the cardboard forward. The load was decreased as a result. D, loading. Extra load was added to the limb by applying manual pressure downward and backward on the superior iliac crest of the pelvis when the limb was in late stance. respectively , as indicated by the force plate signals or the video image, whichever gave the clearest def inition of the step cycle. The hip angle at which swing was initiated was determined by the goniometer reading, where it showed a clear reversal in direction from extension to flexion. All disturbances were induced by the experimenter manually , so variability between disturbances was inevitable. It was therefore important to quantify the characteristics of each disturbance as accurately as possible. The magnitude of the disturbance in which the foot was displaced was determined by the distance the foot travelled during the disturbance, measured from the video record. The duration of the disturbance was also estimated from the video record (inter-frame interval: 33 ms ), so that the velocity of the disturbance could be determined. In order to estimate how much load was added during the loading trials, the rear force plate signal for the right leg during the pre- disturbed and disturbed step was analysed. An example of such a disturbance is shown in Fig. 8 A. We assumed that the right leg slid onto the rear force plate at approximately the same time in its step cycle during the pre- and disturbed step. This is a reasonable assumption because the infants were held stationary over the treadmill while they stepped. The rear force plate signal for the right leg during the pre-disturbed step (demarcated by the vertical continuous lines in Fig. 8 A) was superimposed on that during the disturbed step (demarcated by the dashed lines), with alignment at the beginning. The dif ference betw