Loading the Limb During Rhythmic Leg Movements Lengthens the Duration of Both Flexion and Extension in Human Infants Kristin E. Musselman 1 and Jaynie F. Yang 1,2 1Centre for Neuroscience and 2Department of Physical Therapy, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Submitted 21 August 2006; accepted in ﬁnal form 3 December 2006 Musselman KE, Yang JF. Loading the limb during rhythmic leg movements lengthens the duration of both ﬂexion and extension in human infants. J Neurophysiol 97: 1247–1257, 2007. First published December 6, 2006; doi:10.1152/jn.00891.2006. Sensory input is crit- ical for adapting motor outputs to meet environmental conditions. A ubiquitous force on all terrestrial animals is gravity. It is possible that when performing rhythmic movements, animals respond to load- related feedback in the same way by prolonging the muscle activity resisting the load. We hypothesized that for rhythmic leg movements, the period (extension or ﬂexion) experiencing the higher load will be longer and vary more strongly with cycle period. Six rhythmic movements were studied in human infants (aged 3–10 mo), each providing different degrees of load-related feedback to the legs during ﬂexion and extension of the limb. Kicking in supine provided similar loads (inertial) during ﬂexion and extension. Stepping on a treadmill, kicking in supine against a foot-plate, and kicking in sitting loaded the legs during extension more than ﬂexion, whereas air-stepping and air-stepping with ankle weights did the opposite. Video, electrogoni- ometry, surface electromyography, and contact forces were recorded. We showed that load-related feedback could make either the duration of ﬂexion or extension longer. Within the tasks of stepping and kicking against a plate, infants who exerted lower forces showed shorter extensor durations than those who exerted higher forces. Because older babies tend to step with greater force, we wished to rule out the contribution of age. Eight babies ( /H110228 mo old) were studied during stepping, in which we manipulated the amount of weight- bearing. The same effect of load was seen. Hence, the degree of loading directly affects the duration of extension in an incremental way. INTRODUCTION Animals, including humans, display many forms of rhythmic leg movements, such as kicking, cycling, swimming, crawling, walking, and hopping. This is also true of human infants, who show stepping (Yang et al. 1998), kicking (Thelen 1985), and air-stepping (Yang et al. 1998) behaviors within the ﬁrst year of life. Sensory input modiﬁes and molds many of these rhythmic behaviors to adjust them to physiological and envi- ronmental conditions (Pearson 1993; Rossignol et al. 2006). For example, rapid responses are needed when a cat unexpect- edly steps in a hole in the ground. Leg muscles compensate quickly so that the animal does not fall (Gorassini et al. 1994). Many of these rapid responses are carefully controlled by the nervous system so that they are expressed only when it is appropriate for the successful completion of the task (Buford and Smith 1993; Lam et al. 2003). Slower changes are also needed, for example, to accommodate growth as animals and humans mature. Are there environmental constraints common to all these rhythmic behaviors that require similar coping strategies? Gravity is a ubiquitous force imposed on most movements and might be dealt with in a similar way by the nervous system regardless of the movement. In this paper, we study how young infants respond to load during rhythmic leg movements. For simplicity, we will use the word load to encompass inertial and other loads that might be sensed by proprioceptors, cutaneous, and other receptors. Load-related sensory input has a powerful inﬂuence on the motor output in walking. Direct or indirect activation of ex- tensor muscle afferents that detect stretch and load during the extension period of walking enhances the amplitude of the muscle activity, prolongs ipsilateral extension and inhibits the transition to ﬂexion (Conway et al. 1987; Duysens and Pearson 1980; Guertin et al. 1995; Ivanenko et al. 2002; Pang and Yang 2000; Pearson et al. 1992; Whelan et al. 1995). A similar phenomenon is seen when the period of ﬂexion is loaded during walking. The amplitude and duration of ﬂexor muscle activity can be increased in walking decerebrate cats by me- chanically resisting ﬂexion during swing (Lam and Pearson 2001) or by direct activation of group I afferents from hindlimb ﬂexors (Hiebert et al. 1996; Lam and Pearson 2002). Intracel- lular recording from motoneurons during ﬁctive locomotion in cats suggest excitatory pathways from group I muscle afferents to ﬂexor and bifunctional motoneurons (Perreault et al. 1995; Quevedo et al. 2000; Stecina et al. 2005), very similar to those found to extensor motoneurons. Interestingly, qualitatively similar results were found during ﬁctive scratching in cats (Stecina et al. 2005). The load-related response during walking may be partly responsible for the phenomenon that the duration of stance (extension) is generally longer than swing (ﬂexion) and varies more with the speed of walking. We will call this an extensor- dominated pattern as proposed by Yakovenko et al. (2005). Virtually every animal walks in this way, including insects (Delcomyn 1971), reptiles (Williams 1981), birds (Jacobson and Hollyday 1982), rodents (Cohen and Gans 1975), carni- vores (Arshavskii et al. 1965; Halbertsma 1983), and primates (Vilensky 1983) as well as humans (Grillner et al. 1979). Perhaps gravity imposes greater load-related feedback during extension, resulting in its prolongation. This seems likely because when afferent input is small or absent, the invariant duration of swing (ﬂexion) is more labile (Baker et al. 1984; Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: J. Yang, 2-50 Corbett Hall, Dept. of Physical Therapy, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2G4, Canada (E-mail: jaynie.yang@ualberta.ca). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 97: 1247–1257, 2007. First published December 6, 2006; doi:10.1152/jn.00891.2006. 12470022-3077/07 $8.00 Copyright © 2007 The American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. Bekoff et al. 1987; Douglas et al. 1993; Grillner and Zangger 1979; Kiehn and Kjaerulff 1996; Yakovenko et al. 2005). Other rhythmic movements that impose greater loads during ﬂexion, such as air-stepping in the cat and chick (Johnston and Bekoff 1992, 1996; Vilensky et al. 1989) or air-scratching in the cat (Deliagina et al. 1975), have sometimes been reported to be ﬂexor-dominated. Interestingly, real scratching in intact cats incorporates a period when the limb makes contact with the body during extension, which correspondingly shows a lengthening of the duration in extension (Kuhta and Smith 1990). Additional anecdotal evidence indicated that when a limb inadvertently hits an obstacle during scratching either during extension or ﬂexion, the strength and duration of the muscle activity is enhanced (turtle, Stein and Grossman 1980; cat, Kuhta and Smith 1990). We explored the idea that the human, like other living beings, may have developed a common way to respond to load during rhythmic movements. We studied human infants under the age of 1 yr prior to the development of independent walking. Our hypothesis is that the response to load during different rhythmic leg movements would be similar. The pre- diction is that loading the extensors will lengthen the period of extension, and loading the ﬂexors will lengthen the period of ﬂexion. Preliminary results have been reported in abstract form (Musselman and Yang 2005). METHODS Subjects Sixty-four healthy infants aged 3–10 mo were recruited through parent/infant groups at public health clinics in Edmonton. Infants and their parents attended one testing session lasting /H110111 h. Informed, written consent was obtained from a parent at the time of testing. Ethical approval was obtained from the Health Research Ethics Board of the University of Alberta and Capital Health, Edmonton. Experimental procedures Six rhythmic movements were studied in which three provided greater loads to the legs during extension, two provided greater loads during ﬂexion, and one provided similar loads during ﬂexion and extension. Rhythmic leg movements in infants are more easily elicited when arousal level is high (Thelen 1985); therefore a researcher and/or parent attempted to excite the infant through play. One or two trials (each lasting 1–2 min) of each rhythmic movement were attempted. Short rests of 1–2 min were taken between trials. The infant’s body weight was measured at the end of the experiment. The six movements studied were as follows, separated into three catego- ries. The ﬁrst category was movement that provided approximately equal load during ﬂexion and extension. The movement involved kicking in a supine posture: infants kicked while lying supine on a play mat. The loads experienced by hip and knee muscles during ﬂexion and extension were estimated to be about equal by Jensen et al. (1994) based on inverse dynamics to estimate the joint torques. The second category contained movements that provided more load during extension. Three movements were tested. 1) Stepping on a treadmill—a researcher held the infant under the arms over a tread- mill, allowing the infant to support as much of his/her weight as possible without the infant’s knees collapsing into ﬂexion. The re- searcher’s forearms were supported by a platform to minimize im- posing movements on the infant. The loads experienced by the legs during extension (stance phase) of stepping were dominated by body-weight, which was far greater than the loads experienced during ﬂexion (swing phase) to lift the leg. This can be seen from the magnitude of muscle moments generated in the lower limb during adult walking (Winter 1983). 2) Kicking against a surface—The infants kicked in a supine position with their feet contacting a ﬁrm surface during extension of the leg. For this rhythmic movement, the loads experienced by the leg muscles was greater during extension when the feet exerted force against a ﬁrm surface, compared with ﬂexion when the feet were removed from the surface. The surface against which the infants kicked was either a hard piece of Styrofoam stabilized by a researcher (3 infants) or a Plexiglas plate instrumented with a force transducer (5 infants). 3) Kicking in sitting—The infants were seated at the edge of a small bench allowing their legs to hang over the edge. Kicking in this position consisted of alternate knee ﬂexion and extension, with little hip movement. Knee extension in this posture consists of lifting the leg against gravity, while knee ﬂexion is assisted by gravity. The third category included movements that provided more load during ﬂexion. 1) Air-stepping—air-stepping is a stepping-like move- ment elicited when infants are held upright under their arms with their feet suspended. In this movement, gravity resisted ﬂexion and assisted extension. The ﬂexor muscle torque at the hips is four times greater in air-stepping compared with kicking in supine (Jensen et al. 1994). 2) Weighted air-stepping—air-stepping was also attempted with the infants wearing 0.5 or 1.0 lbs weights on each ankle, to provide additional loads to the ﬂexor muscles during ﬂexion of the limb. The ankle weights were estimated to be 24 –56% of the leg weight. Leg weight was estimated to be 10.9% of body weight (Schneider et al. 1990). Control for effect of age on stepping We found that older infants tended to support a greater percentage of their body weight than younger infants during stepping. To rule out the possibility that the extensor-dominated pattern is an effect of age rather than load, an additional condition was tested. Eight older infants (aged 8 –10 mo) stepped on the treadmill while the amount of weight-bearing was manipulated by the researcher holding the infant. These infants stepped under two conditions: normal weight, in which the infants were encouraged to support as much of their body weight as possible, with support provided only as needed for safety, and low weight, in which the researcher provided consistent force upward, to support more of the infant’s body weight. The manipulations were applied for 20-s periods while the infants were stepping. Instrumentation Surface electromyograms (EMGs) were obtained from the quadri- ceps and hamstrings bilaterally for all infants and from the gastroc- nemius-soleus or tibialis anterior bilaterally in some infants. EMG recordings from the gastrocnemius-soleus and tibialis anterior were not collected from all infants because preliminary data showed that these muscles were not consistently used in the rhythmic movements studied. Pairs of infant-sized silver-silver chloride recording elec- trodes (Kendall, Chicopee, MA) were placed on the skin over the above-mentioned muscles, after the skin was cleaned with alcohol. The signals were conditioned with an AMT-8 ampliﬁer (Bortec Biomedical, Calgary, Canada), band-passed from 10 Hz to 1 kHz. Black leotards covered the electrodes and corresponding wires to prevent movement artifact, and provided good contrast to the skin markers for videotaping. All trials were videotaped (Canon Elura 50, Canon, Mississauga, Canada) in the sagittal plane. The leg fully visible in the video was the reference leg. White adhesive markers were applied to the midline of the trunk above the iliac crest, the greater trochanter, the lateral knee joint line, the lateral malleolus and the head of the ﬁfth metatarsal on the camera side. Markers were also applied to the medial knee joint 1248 K. E. MUSSELMAN AND J. F. YANG J Neurophysiol • VOL 97 • FEBRUARY 2007 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. line, the medial malleolus and the medial aspect of the great toe of the contralateral leg. Twin-axis electrogoniometers (Penny and Giles, Biometrics, Black- wood Gwent, UK) were placed over the right and left knee joints. The knees were chosen rather than the hips because preliminary data showed knee ﬂexion/extension to be characteristic of all 6 rhythmic movements in contrast to hip ﬂexion/extension, which was minimal when the infants kicked in sitting. The arms of the goniometers were aligned with the long axes of the femur and tibia. A split-belt treadmill, described in an earlier study (Yang et al. 2005) was used in this study because it is equipped with separate force plates for the right and left legs, allowing accurate measurement of vertical forces for each limb (model INFSBT-FP, designed and built by R Gramlich and S Graziano, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB). A Plexiglas partition between the right and left treadmill belts helped to keep the legs on separate belts. The two belts were always run at the same speed, between 0.1 and 0.6 m/s depending on the infant’s ability. The Plexiglas foot-plate (2 cm thick, 26 cm high, 34.5 cm wide) was attached to an instrumented uniaxial force transducer (model 60001A50-1000, Intertechnology, Toronto, ON, Canada) that was securely mounted to a wall. The custom-made plate was tested to ensure accurate readings regardless of the position on the plate at which force was exerted. A custom-made digital counter synchronized the video and analog signals at a rate of 1 Hz. The EMG signals were high-pass ﬁltered at 10 Hz and full-wave rectiﬁed. All signals (rectiﬁed EMG, goniometer, force plate and foot-plate) were low-pass ﬁltered at 30 Hz and converted from analog to digital form at 250 Hz (Axoscope, Molec- ular Devices, Foster City, CA). The raw signals were recorded on videotape with a PCM encoder (A.R. Vetter, Redersburg, PA) for back-up. Analysis The video recordings were reviewed to identify sequences of rhythmic movements. The data were included for analysis if the following criteria were met: 1) the infant performed sequences of leg movements, deﬁned as at least two sequential knee ﬂexion-extension movements in both legs (with no pauses /H110221 s and a change in knee angle /H1135020° in both directions), in at least one of six rhythmic movements, and 2) the total number of ﬂexion-extension cycles from these sequences was eight or more for any one rhythmic movement. Video records of the reﬂective markers on the limb were digitized with an automatic tracking system (Peak Motus, Vicon, Los Angeles, CA), and hip and knee angles obtained for the sagittal plane. The extended (i.e., straight) knee and hip were deﬁned as 0 o. Positive angles represent ﬂexion. A customized software program (Matlab, MathWorks, Natick, MA) was used to calculate average hip and knee angles for a full cycle of each rhythmic movement performed by each infant. A subset of subjects ( n /H1100517) was randomly selected for this analysis from a pool of subjects ( n /H1100530) who provided /H113502 forms of rhythmic movements. The durations of the cycle, ﬂexion, and extension were estimated from the knee goniometer signals, using a customized software program (Matlab, MathWorks). This was the preferred method instead of the digitized video data because of the ease with which large sets of data could be analyzed. Cycle period was deﬁned as the onset of knee ﬂexion to the onset of the subsequent knee ﬂexion (solid vertical lines in Fig. 1 mark the onset of knee ﬂexion). Onset of knee extension FIG. 1. Raw data from a few cycles of kicking against a surface ( A), kicking in sitting ( B), stepping on a treadmill ( C), and air-stepping ( D) are shown for infant MPL (5.2 mo old; A, C, and D) and infant MKL (5.5 mo old, B). Hip (solid line) and knee (dashed line) joint angles from the video data ( top), and quadriceps (Quads) and hamstrings (Hams) electromyographic (EMG) activity are shown for the 4 behaviors. Increas- ing angles represent ﬂexion. Solid vertical lines mark the onset of knee ﬂexion. Dotted vertical lines in C mark the onset of knee extension. Solid horizontal lines under joint angle traces mark the time of contact of the foot with the foot-plate (A) or treadmill (C). The stick ﬁgures beside each graph show the ﬂexion and extension mo- tion for one cycle of each type of movement. The marker position for the trunk, hip, knee, and ankle are indicated by T, H, K, and A, respectively, in the stick ﬁgures. 1249CONTROL OF FLEXION AND EXTENSION IN RHYTHMIC MOVEMENTS J Neurophysiol • VOL 97 • FEBRUARY 2007 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. is indicated with vertical dotted lines (Fig. 1 C). The durations of the cycle, ﬂexion and extension were also estimated using the hip angle in the 17 subjects for whom video data were fully analyzed. All except two infants contributed eight or more cycles to each movement type; the two infants contributed six cycles each of hip angle data to air-stepping. Some infants performed rhythmic leg movements in an alternate manner (i.e., 1 leg ﬂexes while the other extends), and others preferred synchronous movements (i.e., both legs ﬂexing or extending at the same time). In the weight-bearing position, synchronous movements resembled hopping on the treadmill. A customized software program (Matlab, MathWorks) was used to determine the phase lag between the two legs. Phase lag was deﬁned as the onset of a cycle in the contralateral limb expressed as a percentage of the cycle of the reference limb. A synchronous movement was deﬁned as one in which the phase lag was 0 –20 or 80 –100%, whereas an alternate movement was a phase lag of 20.1–79.9%. Both forms of coordination were included for analysis. EMG