In the cat, the basic walking pattern is ge nerated by a spinal network that is under the control of supraspinal structures (Grillner, 1981; Armstrong, 1988). In addition, sensory feedback from the skin and the moving muscles has repeatedly been shown to play a signif icant role in the regulation of the network activity and the locomotor movements. Graham Brown (1914) demonstrated that cats with supracollicular lesions of the brainstem are able to adjust their locomotion to the s peed and slope of the treadmill at which they are walking. Furthermore, Grillner & Rossignol (1978) demonstrated in spinalised cats that changes in the hip position have a signif icant ef fect on the timing and amplitude of the locomotor bursts. Sev eral recent studies have demonstrated a resetting of the locomotion movements in the cat by stimulation of different af ferents such as group Ib af ferents (Conway et al. 1987) and the af ferents involved in flexor reflexes (FRA af ferents; Schomburg et al. 1998). This indicates that the sensory feedback mediated by these af ferents is closely integrated into the activity of the spinal network generating the locomotion. Several stu dies have demonstrated a positive contribution of feedback activity in group I af ferents to the locomotor activity , either relatively directly or via an ef fect on the spinal locomotor network (Gossard et al. 1994; McCrea, 1998; Pearson et al. 1998; Hiebert & Pearson, 1999). Other studies have shown that the basic muscle activation prof ile in the stance phase of walking is not substantially altered by short latency af ferent input in the very early part of stance whereas a signif icant sensory contribution later in stance was argued (Gorassini et al. 1994). Group II af ferents also activate a group of inter- neurones in the midlumbar region, which are believed to be closely integrated into the spinal locomotor circuitry and thereby to add signif icantly to the generation of the locomotor activity (Edgley et al. 1988). Journal of Physiology (2000), 523.3 , pp. 817—827 817 Major role for sensory feedback in soleus EMG activity in the stance phase of walking in man T. Sinkjòr, J. B. Andersen, M. Ladouceur, L. O. D. Christensen * and J. B. Nielsen† Center f or Sensory-Motor Interaction, Aalborg University, DK9220 Aalborg, Denmark, † Department of Physiology, University of Kiel, 24098 Kiel, Germany and * Department of Medical Physiology, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark (Received 30 June 1999; accepted after revision 7 December 1999) 1. Sensory feedback plays a major role in the regulation of the spinal neural locomotor circuitry in cats. The present study investigated whether sensory feedback also plays an important role during walking in 20 healthy human subjects, by arresting or unloading the ankle extensors 6 deg for 210 ms in the stance phase of gait. 2. During the stance phase of walking, unloading of the ankle extensors signif icantly (P < 0·05) reduced the soleus activity by 50 % in early and mid-stance at an average onset l a t e n c yo f6 4 ms . 3. The onset and amplitude of the decrease in soleus activity produced by the unloading were unchanged when the common peroneal nerve, which innervates the ankle dorsiflexors, was reversibly blocked by local injection of lidocaine (n = 3). This demonstrated that the ef fect could not be caused by a perip herally m ediated reciprocal inhibition from af ferents in the antagonist nerves. 4. The onset and amplitude of the decrease in soleus activity produced by the unloading were also unchanged when ischaemia was induced in the leg by inflating a cuf f placed around the thigh. At the same time, the group Ia-mediated short latency stretch reflex was completely abolished. This demonstrated that group Ia af ferents were probably not responsible for the decrease of soleus activity produced by the unloading. 5. The f indings demonstrate that af ferent feedback from ankle extensors is of signif icant importance for the activation of these muscles in the stance phase of human walking. Group II andÏor group Ib af ferents are suggested to constitute an important part of this sensory feedback. 9793 Keywords: It is still unclear to what extent a spinal network is involved in the generation of human wa lking and whether sensory feedback to the spinal cord plays a similarly signif icant role in human muscle activation as in the cat. In large parts of the stance phase of human walking, the ankle extensors undergo eccentric contractions, which make the large and fast conducting muscle af ferents from these muscles increase their discharge strongly (e.g. Prochazka, 1995). Through monosynaptic or polysynaptic projections, muscle afferents might, therefore, be expected to make a signif icant contribution to the activation of the muscle ankle extensors in the stance phase of walking. Consequently , sev eral studies have attempted to evaluate the contribution of muscle af ferent feedback to the EMG activity during walking by measuring stretch reflex activity in dif ferent phases of the walking cycle (Yang et al. 1991; Sinkjòr et al. 1996, 1999). However, such data only provide evidence of the signif icance of the muscle afferents in the generation of the correction of possible unexpected external perturbations of the gait, but do not reveal much about the involvement of the muscle afferent activity in generating the EMG activity during unperturbed movements. In the present study , a portable device was used to unload the ankle extensors in the stance phase of walking (Andersen & Sinkjòr, 1995). The idea was that if the muscle af ferents contributed signif icantly to the background EMG, unloading of the ankle extensors would diminish the f iring of the muscle af ferents from the ankle extensors and thereby reduce the background EMG. Unloading of the ankle extensors did indeed reduce the soleus EMG at a latency of around 64 ms . The reduction of EMG activity was still present when transmission in Ia af ferents was blocked by ischaemia and when transmission in the antagonist nerve was blocked by local anaesthesia. On this basis group Ib andÏor group II af ferents are suggested to make a signif icant contribution to the extensor EMG activity in the stance phase of human walking. METHODS Twenty healthy subjects (six females and 14 males, age 26—40 years) were examined. The experiment was repeated in two subjects to ensure reproducibility of the results. All subjects gave their consent to participate. The experimental procedure was approved by the local ethics committee and conducted in conformity with the Declaration of Helsinki. Experimental set-up Bipolar EMG electrodes were placed 2 cm apart on the soleus and the tibialis anterior muscles of the left leg. A ground electrode was placed under the knee. The EMG signals were amplif ied and f iltered from 20—1000 Hz (DISA, model 15C01). Angular position and EMG signals were fed to a data collection module at a sampling rate of 2 kHz (Data Acquisition Card PCL718; 486-66 MHz IBM compatible PC). The EMGs were digitally rectif ied and f iltered from 0t o2 0H z . Walking protocol A portable stretch device capable of rotating the human ankle joint during walking on a treadmill elicited perturbations of the ankle joint. The system consisted of a mechanical joint, which was mounted coaxially with the ankle joint pivot. The mechanical joint was connected to a powerful actuator system by means of two flexible Bowden cables. Leg casts were made in polypropylene to give a form-f itting interface from the mechanical joint to the subject’s ankle. The joint comprised two coaxial actuators that were aligned on a f ixed axle with six independent slide bearings. The f irst joint was attached to the foot and the calf and acted about the ankle joint. The second joint was connected to the Bowden mechanism and also acted about the ankle joint, but with a slip of ±3·5 deg. The slip was imposed to compensate for the elasticity of the Bowden wires and to give the motor controller a proper input to act upon (details in Andersen & Sinkjòr, 1995). When a position feedback from the joint was used, the motor was regulated in such a way that it followed the movement of the ankle joint without influencing the pattern of gait. At any desired time in the gait cycle, a perturbation about the ankle could be applied by rotating the ankle joint with a displacement of up to 10 deg within 40 ms . This could be achieved in subjects of up to 80 kg body weight. For further details on the system, see Andersen & Sinkjòr (1995). During the experiment, the mechanical joint was strapped to the subject’s left leg. A heel contact was placed in the subject’s left shoe, and an insole of the same dimensions was put in the right shoe to equalize the heights above groundlevel in both shoes. The subject walked with a natural cadence at 3·5—4 km h¢ . After an adaptation period of 5 min, an averaged EMG prof ile, triggered from heel contact, was obtained from the left soleus and tibialis anterior muscles. The stance phase was approximately 500 ms long in most subjects and never shorter than 400 ms . Within the stance phase two dif ferent kinds of input were delivered to the ankle joint at various times, 100, 200, 300, 400, or 500 ms, after heel contact. In experiment 1, a 6 deg unloading of the ankle extensors was imposed with a velocity of 330 deg s¢ and a hold phase of 210 ms . In experiment 2, a 0—3 deg hold input was imposed for 210 ms , causing an ankle joint velocity of 0 deg s¢ within 5—10 ms after onset of the ‘hold’ input. For each experiment, the time lags before perturbations were imposed were randomly assigned at 4—6 step intervals until 8—10 stretches at each lag time had been accomplished. The procedure was then repeated for the other experiment. The order in which the two experiments were applied shifted from subject to subject. Eleven subjects participated in this protocol. In three subjects, the kinematics consequences of the unload perturbation during walking were measured around the knee and the hip joint by use of goniometers (Penny & Giles M180). In early and mid-stance phases, the perturbation was followed by a knee extension of 2—4 deg with an onset around 80 ms after perturbation onset. No clear responses related to the perturbation were observed around the hip joint. Reversible block of the common peroneal nerve Part of the walking experiments was repeated in three subjects after the common peroneal nerve (CPN) was blocked by injecting 5—15 ml lidocaine (5 mg ml¢) in doses of up to 5 ml per injection. Lidocaine was injected around the common peroneal nerve just distal to the head of the f ibula. The block was considered complete when the subject was unable to produce any measurable voluntary contraction in the dorsiflexors, judged from the tibialis anterior T. Sinkjòr and others J. Physiol. 523.3818 EMG. To test whether lidocaine had spread to the nerves of the ankle extensors, the maximal M-wave in the EMG of the soleus muscle was elicited by surface stimulation of the tibial nerve in the popliteal fossa before and after the injection. No change in the maximal M-wave (M max ) was seen in two of the subjects. In one subject, a decrease of approximately 15 % of M max in the soleus M_wave was observed. The results from this subject did not dif fer from those in which the maximal M-wave was unchanged after the CPN block. The completeness of the block was also judged from the subject’s inability to dorsiflex the foot. Ischaemia of the lower leg In nine subjects, the left leg was compressed by using tourniquets to perform an ischaemic nerve block by occlusion. The cuf f was placed around the thigh approximately 10 cm above the patella and was inflated to 240 mm Hg to block the blood flow completely during walking. At regular intervals after the onset of the inflation, the H-reflex (in three subjects) and stretch reflex of soleus were elicited in the sitting subject. To evoke H-reflexes, a spring-loaded ball electrode was placed in the popliteal fossa with a reference electrode located above the patella. The H-reflex experiment was performed without removing the portable stretch apparatus. After the H-reflex and the short latency stretch reflex had diminished to less than 10 % of the initial values, the subject was asked to walk with a similar walking pattern as before ischaemia, and part of the walking experiments was repeated. The experiment was terminated when the M-wave began to decrease in amplitude. Data analysis The data were analysed of f-line on a personal computer. The EMG activities of the soleus and tibialis anterior muscles were averaged, rectif ied, and low-pass f iltered at 20 Hz (1st order). If not otherwise stated, the values show averaged data based on 8—10 trials per average. Statistics The data were tested by use of the Wilcoxon matched-pair test with a level of signif icance of P < 0·05. RESULTS In all subjects, the averaged EMGs and position recordings from the control steps were superimposed on the averaged recordings with perturbation. Only trials in which the EMGs and position signals in the control and perturbed steps were matched in the period prior to the perturbation were included in the analysis. Sensory f eedback in human walkingJ. Physiol. 523.3 819 Figure 1. Example of averaged recorded data during control steps and steps with unloading or a hold input to the ankle extensors in the stance phase Control steps, thick lines; steps with an unloading, thin lines, left; steps during a hold input, thin lines, right. A , ankle angle positions. B , rectif ied and f iltered soleus muscle EMG. The black, white and shaded areas represent the dif ferent time windows used to characterise the response. C , rectif ied and f iltered tibialis anterior muscle EMG. 0 deg, standing position. Positive values represent plantar movement directions. Unloading of ankle extensors produces a depression of soleus EMG in the stance phase of walking Figure 1 shows responses from two dif ferent subjects in whom the ankle joint was either perturbed by a 6 deg unloading of the ankle extensors in early stance (‘Unload’, Fig. 1 left) or arrested by applying a ‘hold’ input to the ankle 200 ms after heel contact (‘Hold’, Fig. 1 right). In each graph, the EMGs and ankle joint position recorded in the control situation (thick lines) and with the hold or unloading (thin lines) are shown superimposed. At time zero, the steps, in which a displacement was imposed, deflected from the position of the control steps ( Fig. 1 A ; 0 deg equals standing position). When the ankle was released and returned to the control trajectory , the ankle returned within 150 ms to the position in the control step ( Fig. 1 A) . In the subject shown to the left in Fig. 1, soleus EMG prior to the unloading matched the soleus EMG activity in the control steps until approximately 60 ms after stretch onset ( Fig. 1 B, left). A marked decrease in the soleus EMG activity was present at this time and until approximately 180 ms after unloading onset. This was followed by an increase in the soleus EMG activity . When the unloading was returned, it was followed b yas m a l lp e a kw i t ha no n s e ta t4 0 ms . Most probably this peak reflects the short latency stretch reflex. In the subject to the left in Fig. 1, the perturbation, which stretched the passive dorsiflexors, was followed by a distinct burst in the tibialis anterior EMG with an onset latency of 75 ms ( Fig. 1 C, left). Part of this response appears to be mediated by a transcortical reflex loop (Petersen et al. 1998; Christensen et al. 1999). Not all subjects had this late tibialis anterior (TA) response (see e.g. Fig . 3). Figure 1 (right) shows an example from a subject, in whom the ankle movement was arrested instead of unloaded, i.e. the ankle extensors (instead of being unloaded) and the ankle flexors (instead of being stretched) were both being kept constant in muscle length for 210 ms . In this subject, the onset of the EMG depression was seen at a latency of 53 ms , and it lasted until 42 ms after the release of the hold when a marked short latency response occurred. In this subject, no response was seen in TA. Due to the actuator T. Sinkjòr and others J. Physiol. 523.3820 Figure 2. The ef fect of unloading (left) and holding (right) the ankle extensor movement 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 ms into the stance phase of walking A , percentage decreases in soleus EMG 50 ms ( 4 ), 200 ms ( 5 ) and 150 ms ( % ) from onset of the EMG response. B , onset latency of the unloading (left) and hold (right) responses. C , velocity of the ankle joint during the control steps. The decrease in background soleus EMG following unloading or a hold of the ankle extensors was calculated as the dif ference between the soleus EMG during the control steps and the perturbed steps, expressed as a percentage of the soleus EMG during the control steps. Responses are m e a n s±1 s.d . properties of the perturbation system, the release after the ‘hold’ input caused a < 3·5 deg stretch of the ankle extensors (see Methods). Most probably , this explains the marked short latency stretch reflex in the soleus at this time. The variation in the EMG responses by ‘re-stretch’ at the e n do ft h e2 1 0 ms perturbation may be related to a change in the subjects’ ‘set’ (e.g. ‘fusimotor set’, see Prochazka et al. 1985) triggered by the unload perturbation, or the response to this second ‘re-stretch’ perturbation being mixed with adaptive responses to the f irst. Modulation of the unloading induced depression of soleus EMG in the stance phase of walking The decrease in soleus EMG following an unloading of the ankle extensors was calculated as the dif ference between the soleus EMG during the control steps and the perturbed steps. It was then expressed as a percentage of the soleus EMG at the corresponding time in the unperturbed record. For each of the f ive perturbation onset times (100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 ms from the onset of the stance phase; Fig. 2), no dif ference in the decrease in soleus EMG was present for perturbations induced 50, 100 and 150 ms following the onset of the decrease in soleus EMG ( Fig. 2 A) . The maximal decrease of 51 ± 7 % was seen at 100 ms after heel contact ( Fig. 2, left). The dif ferences at 100 ms during ‘hold’ input ( Fig. 2, right) were probably caused by the fact that fewer data points were collected here because four subjects did not receive a hold input at this time due to technical problems. The ‘hold’ input might not always have prevented the ankle joint from being stretched during the 210 ms hold, which would result in a low estimate for the decrease in soleus EMG in Fig. 2 A (right). In contrast to this, the unloading input always ensured a distinct shorting of the ankle extensors. The onset latency in the unloading experiments did not dif fer for any of the f ive perturbation onset times in the stance phase. It was on average 63·6 ± 3·5 ms .E x c l u d e d from this average were measurements at 500 ms after heel contact. The very small changes in soleus EMG at this time made it dif f icult to carry out a reliable onset measurement. Sensory f eedback in human walkingJ. Physiol. 523.3 821 Figure 3. Example of unloading responses in the early stance phase of walking before (left) and after (right) reversible lidocaine block of the common peroneal nerve (CPN) Thick lines are control steps and thin lines are perturbed steps. A , ankle angle positions. B , rectif ied and f iltered soleus muscle EMG. C , rectif ied and f iltered tibialis anterior muscle EMG. After CPN block, no TA EMG activity was present except crosstalk from other non-blocked muscles. Positive values represent plantar flexion movement direction. One subject. As the ankle joint velocity decreased during the control step ( Fig. 2 C) , a decrease in soleus EMG responses to unloading was observed ( Fig. 2 A) . Block of the com