fncel-13-00512 November 9, 2019 Time: 14:11 # 1 REVIEW published: 12 November 2019 doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00512 Edited by: Michelle Maria Rank, The University of Melbourne, Australia Reviewed by: Andrew Paul Tosolini, University College London, United Kingdom Alain Frigon, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada Kimberly J. Dougherty, Drexel University, United States *Correspondence: Tuan Vu Bui tuan.bui@uottawa.ca †These authors have contributed equally to this work Specialty section: This article was submitted to Cellular Neurophysiology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience Received: 29 August 2019 Accepted: 29 October 2019 Published: 12 November 2019 Citation: Laliberte AM, Goltash S, Lalonde NR and Bui TV (2019) Propriospinal Neurons: Essential Elements of Locomotor Control in the Intact and Possibly the Injured Spinal Cord. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13:512. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00512 Propriospinal Neurons: Essential Elements of Locomotor Control in the Intact and Possibly the Injured Spinal Cord Alex M. Laliberte †, Sara Goltash †, Nicolas R. Lalonde and Tuan Vu Bui * Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Brain and Mind Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada Propriospinal interneurons (INs) communicate information over short and long distances within the spinal cord. They act to coordinate different parts of the body by linking motor circuits that control muscles across the forelimbs, trunk, and hindlimbs. Their role in coordinating locomotor circuits near and far may be invaluable to the recovery of locomotor function lost due to injury to the spinal cord where the ﬂow of motor commands from the brain and brainstem to spinal motor circuits is disrupted. The formation and activation of circuits established by spared propriospinal INs may promote the re-emergence of locomotion. In light of progress made in animal models of spinal cord injury (SCI) and in human patients, we discuss the role of propriospinal INs in the intact spinal cord and describe recent studies investigating the assembly and/or activation of propriospinal circuits to promote recovery of locomotion following SCI. Keywords: propriospinal neurons, spinal locomotor networks, central pattern generators, spinal cord injury, detour circuits INTRODUCTION Successful locomotion depends upon the precise coordination of multiple muscles across numerous joints and limbs, as well as the simultaneous engagement of multiple trunk and stabilizing muscles (Frigon, 2017). This patterned motor output must be adjusted dynamically at diﬀering speeds and in response to various obstacles and perturbations, requiring the constant integration of sensory information. While the role of supraspinal centers, particularly in relation to the planning, initiation, and modulation of locomotion (Lajoie and Drew, 2007; Capelli et al., 2017; Caggiano et al., 2018; Josset et al., 2018; Oueghlani et al., 2018), should not be discounted, many of the key functions of locomotion are performed by interneuron (IN) networks within the spinal cord. This is particularly evident from experiments utilizing ex vivo spinal cord preparations where application of electrical stimulation, light illumination, or a variety of neurotransmitter/pharmacological agonist cocktails have successfully evoked ﬁctive locomotion ñ sustained rhythmic and appropriately patterned ﬂexor and extensor activity recorded in motor nerves of the spinal cord ñ in the absence of supraspinal input (Atsuta et al., 1991; Jiang et al., 1999; Whelan et al., 2000; Hägglund et al., 2010). The innate potential of select propriospinal INs, deﬁned as spinal cord INs that originate and terminate within the spinal cord while spanning at least one spinal cord segment, to activate locomotion makes them an attractive therapeutic target for spinal cord injury (SCI) (Flynn et al., 2011). However, an incomplete understanding of their Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 512 fncel-13-00512 November 9, 2019 Time: 14:11 # 2 Laliberte et al. Propriospinal Neurons in Injured Spinal Cord integration within locomotor systems remains a signiﬁcant obstacle to the use of propriospinal INs in the therapies seeking to restore lost locomotor function. Emergent genetic and molecular techniques that allow the identiﬁcation and manipulation of speciﬁc propriospinal IN populations have greatly accelerated this research. It is the purpose of this review to summarize and update the current state of knowledge regarding the organization and function of locomotion-associated propriospinal INs in intact and spinal cord lesioned mammals as well as to examine seminal and recent attempts to manipulate propriospinal INs to rescue locomotor function. PROPRIOSPINAL INTERNEURONS PROPAGATE LOCOMOTOR COMMANDS FROM SUPRASPINAL LOCOMOTOR REGIONS At ﬁrst glance, propriospinal INs occupy a conceptually straightforward role in locomotion. Propriospinal INs receive inputs from descending locomotor pathways and propagate received motor commands rostrocaudally to locomotor circuits via short or long, ipsilateral or commissural axons ( Figure 2A). To fulﬁll this role, some propriospinal INs project axons that only travel a few segments (short propriospinal), while others project axons that travel many more segments, spanning far enough to connect cervical with lumbar segments (long propriospinal). Short and long propriospinal IN axons can stay within the same side of the body as their cell bodies (Figure 1, straight lines), while others cross to the other side (Figure 1, lines with arc segments). We include commissural INs for their possible involvement in forming detour circuits following an injury to the spinal cord. Evidence for the role of propriospinal INs in propagating locomotor commands rostrocaudally has been well-established in the mammalian CNS. For example, the application of certain neurotransmitter agonists to only the cervicothoracic spinal cord was found to generate rhythmic hindlimb activity in neonatal rat preparations (Cowley and Schmidt, 1997). Transections at caudal thoracic and rostral lumbar segments also abolished locomotor activity below the caudal lesion site, demonstrating the importance of INs in this region for locomotor output in more caudal lumbar segments (Cowley and Schmidt, 1997). Additional evidence for propriospinal locomotor relays was demonstrated using brainstem stimulation in rat brainstem- spinal cord in vitro preparations, where hindlimb locomotor- like activity was observed despite staggered contralateral spinal cord lesions that severed all ipsilateral bulbospinal connections on both sides of the spinal cord (Cowley et al., 2008). These ﬁndings suggest that either brainstem locomotor regions have projections to the contralateral spinal cord that decussate at the spinal levels between the hemisections, or that propriospinal INs with contralateral projections propagate locomotor commands from supraspinal centers (e.g., red lines with arc segments in Figure 1 ). The latter explanation that propriospinal networks are integrated into bulbospinal locomotor control appears more likely given (1) the predominance of ipsilaterally projecting FIGURE 1 | Propriospinal neurons of the spinal cord. Schematic diagram depicting several types of propriospinal neurons within the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinal cords. For the sake of simplicity, some types are not depicted such as bifurcating commissural interneurons with axon collaterals that ascend and descend. Depicted medio-lateral locations of different types of priopriospinal neurons or their terminations are not meant to be accurate representations of known localizations. axons over contralaterally projecting from brainstem locomotor centers (Stelzner and Cullen, 1991; Liang et al., 2011; Sivertsen et al., 2016) and (2) subsequent physiological experiments which found that blockade of synaptic transmission in cervicothoracic segments (using a variety of strategies: no Ca 2+, high Mg 2+, CNQX, AP-5) resulted in the abolition of brainstem stimulation- induced lumbar locomotor activity (Zaporozhets et al., 2006). These studies strongly suggest a role for propriospinal INs in the propagation of locomotor commands, implying that propriospinal INs either innervate or form part of the locomotor Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 512 fncel-13-00512 November 9, 2019 Time: 14:11 # 3 Laliberte et al. Propriospinal Neurons in Injured Spinal Cord central pattern generator (CPG). Indeed, it has been proposed that the locomotor CPG may be composed of multiple unit CPGs distributed along the length of the spinal cord and across its midline controlling subsets of muscles, in particular, those acting upon particular joints such as the hip, knee, or ankle (Grillner et al., 1976; Kjaerulﬀ and Kiehn, 1996; Wiggin et al., 2012; Gerasimenko et al., 2016; Mantziaris et al., 2017). Short propriospinal neurons ( Figure 1 , short lines, green and blue, straight or with arc segment) may act as relays between non- overlapping unit CPGs within cervical or lumbar segments. Alternatively, short propriospinal INs may be part of unit CPGs if the circuitry for each unit CPG is spread out over several spinal cord segments. In either case, propriospinal connections can propagate locomotor commands from their initial targets to adjacent nodes containing CPG components. PROPRIOSPINAL INTERNEURONS PERFORM FUNCTIONS OF THE LOCOMOTOR CPG Ontogenic studies of molecularly deﬁned populations of propriospinal INs have provided ample evidence of the contributions of propriospinal INs to locomotor CPG function. While others have extensively reviewed the developmental origin of INs comprising the locomotor CPG (Gosgnach et al., 2017), this information is critical to understanding the role of propriospinal INs in locomotor function and therefore, a brief overview of this topic is warranted. It should be noted that each of the developmentally deﬁned IN populations are believed to be heterogeneous to varying degrees, potentially containing several distinct subpopulations of INs with diﬀerent characteristics. As a result, not all of these subpopulations will meet the currently used deﬁnition of propriospinal INs. However, at least some portion of the IN populations discussed below appear to be propriospinal based on their reported projection characteristics (reviewed in Lu et al., 2015), and their putative function in locomotion (Table 1). During embryogenesis, the spatiotemporal distribution of signaling molecules such as Wnt, BMP , and Sonic hedgehog, across three spatial axes ñ rostralñcaudal, medialñlateral, and dorsalñventral ñ leads to a complex spatiotemporal pattern of transcription factor activation that results in the emergence of a speciﬁc set of progenitor pools within the spinal cord (Dasen and Jessell, 2009). In total, there are 13 progenitor pools from which INs and motoneurons will emerge. All dorsal IN populations (dI1ñdI6) come from progenitor pools pd1ñ6 and the late-born pdILA and pdILB. Four ventral IN populations (V0ñV3) emerge from the p0ñ3 pool while the motoneurons arise from the motor domain pMN (reviewed in Lu et al., 2015). The ventrally derived populations have received considerable interest in relation to locomotion, as it has been postulated that they constitute the core elements of the CPG located primarily within the spinal ventral horn (reviewed in Kiehn, 2016). Therefore, many genetic manipulations have targeted these ventral IN populations. Initial experiments with isolated spinal cords observed the conservation of rhythmicity following a sagittal section along the midline of chronically isolated adult cat spinal cords (Kato, 1990). This observation seems to indicate that rhythmogenesis can be generated solely from ipsilaterally projecting neurons within each side of the spinal cord. Therefore, the ﬁrst ablation studies targeted ipsilaterally projecting INs. The V1 embryonic population of INs, which are marked by the expression of the engrailed-1 (En1) transcription factor, generates inhibitory neurons that project ipsilaterally (Higashijima et al., 2004; Benito-Gonzalez and Alvarez, 2012). Approximately 30% TABLE 1 | Overview of major developmentally deﬁned interneuron populations and their proposed role in locomotion. Interneuron population Projection characteristics Neurotransmitter phenotype Putative function in mammalian locomotion V0V (DBX1+/EVX1+) Long and short commissural Glutamatergic (excitatory) Coordinates left–right alternation during locomotion. Loss of function particularly affects alternation during higher speed locomotion. V0D (DBX1+/PAX7+) Long and short commissural GABA/glycinergic (inhibitory) Coordinates left–right alternation during locomotion. Loss of function particularly affects alternation during lower speed locomotion. V0C (DBX1+/EVX1+/PITX2+) Short ipsilateral and commissural Cholinergic (excitatory) Modulates activity of some motoneuron pools during speciﬁc locomotor tasks. V1 (EN1+) Short and long ipsilateral GABA/glycinergic (inhibitory) Coordinate ﬂexor–extensor activity, potentially through the inhibition ﬂexor activity. Include Renshaw and Ia IN populations with well-deﬁned roles in recurrent and reciprocal inhibition of motoneurons. V2a (CHX10+) Long and short ipsilateral Glutamatergic (excitatory) Propagate locomotor commands to commissural interneurons involved with left–right coordination. V2b (GATA2/3+) Long and short ipsilateral GABA/glycinergic (inhibitory) Coordinate ﬂexor–extensor activity, potentially through the inhibition of extensor activity. V3 (SIM1+) Short commissural and ipsilateral Glutamatergic (excitatory) Stabilize locomotor pattern, reducing variability in ipsilateral and contralateral gait. dI3 (ISL1+) Short ipsilateral Glutamatergic (excitatory) Relay cutaneous and proprioceptive information to CPG. Essential for locomotor rehabilitation. dI4 dILA (Ptf1a+) Short ipsilateral Short commissural GABAergic (inhibitory) Mediate presynaptic inhibition of sensory terminals onto spinal neurons to gate sensory feedback and ensure smooth execution of movements. dI6 (DMRT3+ and/or WT1+) Short commissural and ipsilateral GABA/glycinergic (inhibitory) Stabilize locomotor pattern, reducing variability in ipsilateral and contralateral gait. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 512 fncel-13-00512 November 9, 2019 Time: 14:11 # 4 Laliberte et al. Propriospinal Neurons in Injured Spinal Cord of En1+ INs become Ia INs or Renshaw cells and form inhibitory synapses onto motoneurons or other Ia INs (Alvarez et al., 2005). As the V1/Ia IN population projects ipsilaterally within the spinal cord, targeted ablation of En1+ INs was expected to result in the loss of ﬂexorñextensor intralimb coordination. Instead, loss of V1 neurons resulted in a loss of high-speed locomotor activity. Indeed, mice lacking V1 INs had lower top speeds on the rotarod test compared to their control mates, and the duration of the step cycle was increased in recordings made from isolated spinal cords (Gosgnach et al., 2006). Subsequent experiments using genetic methods to block synaptic transmission from V1 INs instead of developmental ablation recapitulated this ﬁnding (Zhang et al., 2014). While V1 IN silencing alone did not prevent ﬂexorñextensor coordination, V1 IN ablation resulted in a prolonged ﬂexion phase in both neonatal and adult mice, while optogenetic activation of V1s resulted in the suppression of ﬂexor activity (Britz et al., 2015). A recent study provided further conﬁrmation of the role of V1 INs in the regulation of ﬂexor burst duration, and also found evidence that they regulate extensor activity in the absence of commissural input, possibly suggesting a more dynamic role for V1 INs in the generation of biomechanically advantageous ﬂexion/extension asymmetry (Falgairolle and O’Donovan, 2019). Interestingly, the combined inactivation of both V1 IN and a subset of the V2 IN population (V2b) resulted in a total loss of ﬂexorñextensor alternation (Zhang et al., 2014). Parallel examination of V2b INs determined that they inhibit extensor motoneurons in an analogous manner to the V1 INs with ﬂexor motoneurons (Britz et al., 2015). These results appear to support the functional cooperativity of V1 and V2b INs to maintain the appropriate balance of ﬂexor and extensor activity during locomotion. Another ipsilaterally projecting population of propriospinal INs that has garnered interest in the context of locomotion is the Chx10-expressing V2a subpopulation. Unlike V1 and V2b INs, the V2a INs exclusively provide glutamatergic input in the mouse spinal cord (Al-Mosawie et al., 2007; Lundfald et al., 2007). The zebraﬁsh homolog to the V2a population, identiﬁed by its expression of Chx10, is suﬃcient for generating locomotor rhythm (Ljunggren et al., 2014); however, this role is not entirely conserved in mammals. Optogenetic or synaptic blockade of the Shox2 + INs, some of which belong to the V2a population, perturbed locomotor rhythmogenesis in neonate mice (Dougherty et al., 2013), but ablation of only the Shox2+ V2a INs did not eliminate the mammalian spinal cord’s ability to generate rhythm. Surprisingly, V2a IN ablation created deﬁcits in leftñright alternation at intermediate to high speeds in adult mice (Crone et al., 2008, 2009), suggesting that the V2a INs, in fact, also innervate commissural INs responsible for leftñright coordination. While rhythmicity is conserved following midsagittal lesioning of the spinal cord, leftñright coordination is lost, which is an important element of gait. Cross-talk between contralateral halves of the CPG is a critical feature of the locomotor network, where activity on one side can aﬀect the contralateral locomotor output. This contralateral inﬂuence has been demonstrated through work involving split-belt treadmills (left and right limbs can be made to walk at diﬀerent speeds), where compensatory alterations in phase duration were observed on the contralateral side when the speed was changed unilaterally (Frigon et al., 2013, 2017). Interestingly, this compensation occurs even in spinal cord transected cats, suggesting a propriospinal mechanism (Frigon et al., 2013, 2017). Indeed, the silencing of lumbar propriospinal neurons projecting from L2 to L5 in the adult rat was found to alter leftñright coordination independent of speed (Pocratsky et al., 2017). These L2-to-L5 projecting propriospinal neurons consisted of both ipsilaterally projecting and commissural INs. Commissural INs ensure proper coordination of both sides of the body during locomotion. These neurons may be contacted by V1 and V2a/V2b subtypes, potentially allowing them to coordinate shifts in ﬂexionñextension across the left and right limbs during changes in speed. Commissural INs act by providing an excitatory or inhibitory drive to contralateral motor circuits. Their axons cross the midline at the same level as their cell bodies (Matsuyama et al., 2006) and then can project up and/or down the spinal cord (Eide et al., 1999; Stokke et al., 2002; Quinlan and Kiehn, 2007), even going as far as communicating between the cervical and lumbar segments (English et al., 1985; Matsuyama et al., 2004; Reed et al., 2006; Brockett et al., 2013; Ni et al., 2014; Mitchell et al., 2016; Ruder et al., 2016). One such population is the V0 INs, which are classiﬁed by their early expression of the developing brain homeobox 1 (DBX1). There are at least three subtypes of V0 INs: V0 D (delineated by paired box protein 7, PAX7), V0 V (express even-skipped homolog protein 1, EVX1), and V0 C, which express paired-like homeobox transcription factor 2 (PITX2) and EVX1 (Moran- Rivard et al., 2001; Zagoraiou et al., 2009; Talpalar et al., 2013). Targeted ablation of DBX1-expressing neurons (all V0