Physiologically Based Controller for Generating Overground Locomotion Using Functional Electrical Stimulation Lisa Guevremont, Jonathan A. Norton, and Vivian K. Mushahwar Department of Biomedical Engineering and Centre for Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Submitted 5 November 2006; accepted in ﬁnal form 10 January 2007 Guevremont L, Norton JA, Mushahwar VK. Physiologically based controller for generating overground locomotion using functional electrical stimulation. J Neurophysiol 97: 2499 –2510, 2007. First published January 17, 2007; doi:10.1152/jn.01177.2006. The physio- logical control of stepping is governed both by signals descending from supraspinal systems and by circuitry residing within the lumbo- sacral spinal cord. The goal of this study was to evaluate the capacity of physiologically based controllers to restore functional overground locomotion after neurological damage, such as spinal cord injury when used in conjunction with functional electrical stimulation. For this purpose we implemented and tested two controllers: 1) an intrin- sically timed system that generated a predetermined rhythmic output and 2) a sensory-based system that used feedback signals to make appropriate transitions between the unloaded (ﬂexion) and loaded (extension) phases of the gait cycle. A third controller, a combination of the intrinsically timed and sensory-driven controllers, was imple- mented and two sessions were conducted to demonstrate the func- tional advantages of this approach. The controllers were tested in anesthetized cats, implanted with intramuscular electrodes in six major extensor and ﬂexor muscles of the hindlimbs. The cats were partially supported on a sliding trolley that was propelled by the hindlimbs along a 2.5-m instrumented walkway. Ground reaction forces and limb positions were measured by force plates in the walkway and by accelerometers secured to the legs of the cat, respectively. The controllers were used to generate patterns of stim- ulation that would elicit alternating ﬂexor (swing) and extensor (stance) movements in the hindlimbs. Using either the intrinsically timed or sensory-driven controllers, the cats were able to travel a distance of 2.5 m, taking ﬁve to 12 steps. Functional stepping sequences were more easily achieved using the intrinsically timed controller as the result of a lower sensitivity to the selection of initial stimulation parameters. However, unlike the sensory-driven control- ler, the intrinsically timed controller was unable to adjust to overcome walkway resistance and muscle fatigue. Neither system was consis- tently able to ensure load-bearing stepping. Therefore we propose the use of a “combined controller” that relies heavily on intrinsic timing but that can be reset based on sensory signals. A combined controller such as this one may provide the best solution for restoring robust overground locomotion after spinal cord injury. INTRODUCTION The control of stepping in physiological systems has been shown to be achieved both through signals descending from supraspinal systems and through circuitry residing within the lumbosacral spinal cord. Early studies suggested that locomo- tion is generated through a chain of reﬂexes (Sherrington 1910). In 1911 Brown (1911) demonstrated that the spinal cord of adult cats is capable of generating rhythmic locomotor outputs in the absence of descending drive or sensory input. Later experiments supported the existence of locomotor-related neural circuitry within the spinal cord, now commonly referred to as the locomotor central pattern generator (CPG) (Grillner 1985; Orlovsky et al. 1999). Although the CPG is capable of generating a rhythmic output when activated by a tonic input in the form of electrical stimulation (Dimitrijevic et al. 1998; Guevremont et al. 2006; Magnuson and Trinder 1997; Shik 1997) or application of pharmacological agents (Cazalets et al. 1995; Cowley and Schmidt 1997; Kjaerulff and Kiehn 1996; Rossignol et al. 2001), it was shown to be modulated by afferent feedback. Limb position (Grillner and Rossignol 1978) and force (Duysens and Pearson 1980) are thought to play roles in the timing and duration of ﬂexor (swing) and extensor (stance) activation during stepping (Norton et al. 2005). The goal of the current study was to evaluate the capacity of externally implemented controllers mimicking these physio- logical systems in restoring locomotion after neurological damage, such as a spinal cord injury. Functional electrical stimulation (FES) is used as an inter- face with the nervous system to restore function to muscles and organs after disease or injury. The efﬁcacy of the technique is based on the fact that after spinal cord injury the motoneurons below the level of the lesion remain intact and form a viable connection with the muscles they innervate. Electrical stimuli applied to intact nerves or muscles can then be used to generate functional contractions of targeted muscles. The clinical use of electrical stimulation dates back to the early 1960s when it was ﬁrst used as a method for restoring lower (Liberson et al. 1961) and upper limb (Long and Masciarelli 1963) function after stroke or spinal cord injury. Currently available systems for restoring stepping require the user to initiate each step through the use of manual push buttons. In addition to being less desirable to the user, these hand-controlled systems have a higher metabolic cost than that of more automated controllers (Popovic et al. 2003). The ultimate system would be able to generate stable and reliable stepping in a manner similar to the way normal locomotion is controlled, using a combination of subconscious mechanisms with intermittent conscious effort. Previous studies conducted in our laboratory demonstrated that intraspinal microstimulation can be used to generate in- place stepping in cats with spinal cord injury (Saigal et al. 2004). This was ﬁrst achieved by applying predetermined Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: V. K. Mushahwar, 513 Heritage Medical Research Centre, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2S2, Canada (E-mail: vivian.mushahwar@ualberta.ca). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement ” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 97: 2499 –2510, 2007. First published January 17, 2007; doi:10.1152/jn.01177.2006. 24990022-3077/07 $8.00 Copyright © 2007 The American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. phasic sequences of stimulation through groups of microwires generating reciprocal ﬂexion and extension movements of the hindlimbs. Sensory-driven stepping was also achieved using a physiologically based if–then rule to govern the transitions between stance and swing (Prochazka 1996; Saigal et al. 2004). In the present study we focused on investigating the capacity of two controllers to generate overground locomotion through the independent use of intrinsically timed (CPG) or sensory- driven phase transitions. Although it is unclear whether a CPG plays a signiﬁcant role in human locomotion (Dimitrijevic et al. 1998), the intrinsic rhythmicity and ability to modulate output in response to external conditions makes the CPG an attractive model for the design of an FES control system. Our observations suggest that although both controllers were capa- ble of generating overground locomotion, neither provided consistent load-bearing stepping. In addition, the intrinsically timed controller suffered from an inability to respond to chang- ing internal and external conditions (i.e., fatigue and friction) and the sensory-driven controller exhibited high sensitivity to the selection of the initial parameters. For these reasons we suggest that a “combined controller,” which uses sensory signals to modify an intrinsic rhythm may signiﬁcantly im- prove the robustness of stepping. The combined controller may offer a more physiological representation of the neural control of overground locomotion by providing a balance between the roles of the CPG and sensory input. A controller was imple- mented and two experimental sessions were conducted to demonstrate the potential advantages of this combined ap- proach. METHODS Eight spinally intact adult male cats weighing between 3.5 and 5.0 kg were used in the study. All experimental procedures were approved by the University of Alberta Animal Welfare Committee. The cats were anesthetized for the duration of each recording session and intramuscular (IM) electrodes were implanted percutaneously into six major extensor and ﬂexor muscles of each of the hindlimbs. At the end of the experiment the electrodes were removed and the animals recovered in a heated kennel. A total of 14 recording sessions were performed for this study (ﬁve animals were tested more than once). Animal preparation and intramuscular electrode implantation Anesthesia was temporarily induced through the inhalation of isoﬂurane (2–3% isoﬂuorane in carbogen) and an intravenous catheter was inserted for administering sodium pentobarbital throughout the remainder of the experiment (0.25 mg/kg induction; maintenance 1:10 saline dilutions of the anesthetic). Sterilized IM electrodes were implanted bilaterally in six muscles that act to ﬂex or extend the joints of the hindlimb. The implanted muscles were: sartorius anterior (hip ﬂexor), semimembranosus anterior (hip extensor), biceps femoris posterior (knee ﬂexor), vastus lateralis (knee extensor), tibialis ante- rior (ankle ﬂexor), and gastrocnemius lateralis (ankle extensor). In- tramuscular electrodes (nine-strand stainless steel Cooner wire, insu- lated except for 3- to 4-mm tips) were implanted near the motor point of the desired muscle according to the technique described by Bas- majian and DeLuca (1985). Experimental setup and data acquisition After the implantation of IM wires the animal was transferred to a partial body support sling suspended from a sliding trolley (Fig. 1 A). The trolley was placed on a track system allowing it to move with variable friction along the length of a 2.5-m custom-built walkway. The walkway consisted of two three-axis parallel force plates. The hindlimbs of the animal were placed on individual force plates allowing independent left and right force signals to be recorded along the entire length of the walkway during the stepping sequences. Accelerometers were secured ﬁrmly between the ankle and metatarsal phalangeal (MTP) joint of each hindlimb to provide a voltage signal representing the relative ﬂexion or extension of the limb. Kinematic tracking markers were placed on the right side of the cat to indicate the iliac crest and the hip, knee, ankle, and MTP joints. Because of the FIG. 1. Experimental setup. Schematic of setup used for animal suspension and intramuscular (IM) stimulation ( A). Weight of the animal is partially supported by a body harness. A sling placed under the chin of the animal (not shown) is used to support the head and maintain an open airway throughout the recording session. Cat is positioned with its forelimbs on a sliding platform that is slightly elevated over 2 parallel force plates for ground reaction force (GRF) recordings. Accelerometers are attached securely between the ankle and metatarsal phalangeal (MTP) joints for limb position recordings. Joint markers are attached for kinematic analysis. B: comparison of accelerometer signals indicating limb position (LP) and joint angles derived from video data. C: data from an intact cat during overground locomotion. Stick ﬁgures and joint angles are reconstructed from video data. Each stick ﬁgure represents the data at 2-s intervals. 2500 GUEVREMONT, NORTON, AND MUSHAHWAR J Neurophysiol • VOL 97 • MARCH 2007 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. movement of the skin over the knee joint during locomotion the knee joint marker could not be used to indicate the correct joint location. Therefore limb segment lengths were recorded and triangulation algorithms were used to provide a better estimate of the position of the knee joint. The raw accelerometer and force signals as well as the stimulation control signals generated by the controller were sampled at 2,000 or 4,000 samples/s using a CED Power 1401 A/D board and Spike2 data acquisition software (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). The entire length of the walkway was ﬁlmed from the right side using a high-speed JVC digital video camera (120 frames/s) placed orthog- onally to the midpoint at a distance of about 4 m. This signiﬁcantly reduced the distortion in the limb segments arising from parallax effects. A calibration grid was also attached to the trolley to perform frame-by-frame scaling of the video data. A light-emitting diode (LED) was used to synchronize the kinematic and kinetic data. Intramuscular stimulation protocol Six dual-channel constant-current stimulators (EMS-6500, Electro- stim Medical Services, Tampa, FL) were used to apply patterned trains of stimulation (biphasic charge balanced, 0.1–20 mA, 200- /H9262s depolarizing pulse, 50 pulses/s) to activate ﬂexor and extensor mus- cles in sequences that would generate coordinated stepping move- ments. At the onset of each experiment the stimulation amplitude for motor threshold (level eliciting ﬁrst visible muscle contraction) was deter- mined as well as the stimulation amplitude required to generate the desired response. This was done using 1-s trains of stimulation applied to each individual muscle. After the stimulation amplitudes for indi- vidual muscles were obtained, synergies (groups of ﬂexor or extensor muscles) were tested to generate functional movements of the whole limb with proportional changes in the joint angles throughout the action. Stimulation amplitudes were adjusted to evoke qualitatively balanced responses in the left and right legs. The adjusted stimulation amplitudes generating the desired muscle responses were recorded and used during the initial stepping trial as the plateau values for the stimulation envelopes. Further adjustments were made to these values from trial to trial based on observations made during the stepping sequences or by retesting the responses using 1-s-long stimulation trains applied to individual or synergistic muscles. This was done to achieve a combination of muscle activation levels that generated bilaterally balanced functional gait. This balance was subject to change as a result of factors such as the level of muscle fatigue and the amount of walkway friction at the onset of each stepping trial. This high dependency on initial parameter selection is consistent with results seen in two-dimensional (2D) (Yakovenko et al. 2004) and three-dimensional (3D) (Ekeberg and Pearson 2005) models of feline locomotion. The control system We designed three controllers that reﬂected some of the principles thought to govern locomotion in physiological systems: one that behaved like an intrinsically timed CPG, another that was a fully sensory-driven state controller, and a third that was a combination of intrinsically timed and sensory-driven control. Each controller used a different method to determine the timing and duration of the gait phases. However, a single output algorithm was used to translate these phases into stimulation waveforms based on predetermined stimula- tion levels. The controllers were tested during 14 recording sessions. The intrinsically timed controller generated consistent patterns of ﬂexion and extension based entirely on intrinsic timing in a manner similar to the output of an isolated CPG. The gait cycle of a cat can be divided into one ﬂexion (F) and three extension (E1, E2, and E3) phases (Engberg and Lundberg 1969). A basic gait cycle consisting of a swing (hip, knee, and ankle ﬂexion: F) phase and a stance (hip, knee, and ankle extension: E3) phase was implemented in all experiments. After preliminary tests using various phase durations, including those described by Halbertsma (1983), we used a 2-s gait cycle and set the stance and swing phase durations to 60 and 40%, respectively. Delayed retraction (hip extension) was added to this cycle so that the propulsive extension of the hip was initiated after the load-bearing extension of the knee and ankle was well established. In the ﬁnal recording sessions we also added a short burst of stimulation to the knee ﬂexor at the onset of swing to prevent toe drag (two sessions) and an increase in knee extensor stimulation during retraction to maintain ground contact (one session). All stimulation envelopes were trapezoidal in shape, consisting of three segments; 1) a ramp segment where the stimulation increased from motor threshold to the previ- ously selected desired value, 2) a constant stimulation segment where the desired amplitude was maintained for the duration of the phase, and 3) a ramp segment where the stimulation amplitude returned from the desired level to motor threshold before the stimulation terminated. Step period, percentage of the phase spent in stance and swing, timing of the retraction phase, and duration of the ramp segments were set on the computer through a user interface to the control program. We did not experiment with different gait speeds using the intrinsically timed controller. However, this could be accomplished by changing the step period and adjusting the timing of the various gait phases as well as the stimulation amplitudes to achieve functional responses within a new phase duration. Figure 2 A shows a conceptual illustration of a half-center CPG model that would generate continuous and rhythmic ﬂexion and extension output patterns similar to those generated by our controller. Also shown is a schematic representation of stimulation envelopes achieved using the previously determined amplitudes with the intrinsically timed controller. Functional overground locomotion was ﬁrst demonstrated in each cat using this controller before testing the other controllers. The activation proﬁles for the last step (to the right of the vertical dashed line, Fig. 2 A) represent envelopes of electromyographic (EMG) data during overground locomotion in awake, intact cats, as collated from multiple sources by Yakovenko et al. (2002). The sensory-driven controller relied entirely on feedback signals to time the switching between ﬂexion and extension activity. Signals representing hip angle and ground reaction force (GRF) were used because they play signiﬁcant roles in governing phase transitions in physiological systems (Duysens and Pearson 1980; Grillner and Rossignol 1978; McVea et al. 2005; Norton et al. 2005). The role of these signals during gait can be described by a set of if–then rules (Prochazka 1996) that we implemented using ﬁnite state control (Fig. 2B). The following rules were used to govern the swing-to-stance and stance-to-swing phase transitions: Stance-to-swing transitions: IF the ipsilateral limb is extended AND the ipsilateral limb is unloaded AND the contralateral limb is loaded THEN initiate swing in the ipsilateral limb Swing-to-stance transitions: IF the ipsilateral limb is ﬂexed THEN initiate stance in the ipsilateral limb Although these rules allowed the left and right limbs to switch independently, they prevented the occurrence of a state of double swing and allowed a period of double stance during which both limbs were in the loaded phase of the gait cycle. The rule governing swing-to-stance allowed for early termination of swing if the stance leg became unloaded. This was done to avoid periods of no body support throughout the stepping sequences. Modulation of the stimu- lation amplitude applied to the knee extensor was also 