Human Lumbosacral Spinal Cord Interprets Loading During Stepping SUSAN J. HARKEMA, 3 SEANNA L. HURLEY, 3 UDAY K. PATEL, 3 PHILIP S. REQUEJO, 3 BRUCE H. DOBKIN, 1,3 AND V. REGGIE EDGERTON 2,3 1 Departments of Neurology and 2 Physiological Science and 3The Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095 Harkema, Susan J., Seanna L. Hurley, Uday K. Patel, Philip Whether similar locomotor neural circuits are present in hu- S. Requejo, Bruce H. Dobkin, and V. Reggie Edgerton. Human mans has not been determined, although it now appears that lumbosacral spinal cord interprets loading during stepping. J. Neu- at least some of the circuitry necessary to generate ﬁctiverophysiol. 77: 797–811, 1997. Studies suggest that the human locomotion has been conserved in nonhuman primateslumbosacral spinal cord can generate steplike oscillating electro- (Hultborn et al. 1993).myographic (EMG) patterns, but it remains unclear to what degree Spinal-cord-injured (SCI) humans with minimal supraspi-these efferent patterns depend on the phasic peripheral sensory nal input generated motor patterns that improved their loco-information associated with bilateral limb movements and loading. motor ability (Barbeau and Blunt 1991; Dietz et al. 1995;We examined the role of sensory information related to lower- Wernig and Mu¨ller 1992). SCI subjects with no supraspinalextremity weight bearing in modulating the efferent motor patterns of spinal-cord-injured (SCI) subjects during manually assisted input below their lesions can generate oscillating motor pat- stepping on a treadmill. Four nonambulatory subjects, each with a terns in the lower limbs without the sensations of weight- chronic thoracic spinal cord injury, and two nondisabled subjects bearing stepping (Bussel et al. 1988; Rosenfeld et al. 1995) were studied. The level of loading, EMG patterns, and kinematics and can generate steplike efferent patterns when partiallyof the lower limbs were studied during manually assisted or unas- supported over a moving treadmill belt and manually assistedsisted stepping on a treadmill with body weight support. The rela- with stepping (Dietz et al. 1995; Dobkin et al. 1995). Thesetionships among lumbosacral motor pool activity [soleus (SOL), studies suggest that the human lumbosacral spinal cord canmedial gastrocnemius (MG), and tibialis anterior (T A)], limb generate steplike oscillating electromyographic (EMG) pat-load, muscle-tendon length, and velocity of muscle-tendon length terns when assisted by the sensory information associatedchange were examined. The EMG mean amplitude of the SOL, with weight-bearing stepping. It remains unclear, however,MG, and TA was directly related to the peak load per step on the lower limb during locomotion. The effects on the EMG amplitude to what degree these efferent patterns depend on the phasic were qualitatively similar in subjects with normal, partial, or no peripheral sensory information associated with bilateral limb detectable supraspinal input. Responses were most consistent in movements and loading. the SOL and MG at load levels of õ50% of a subject’s body The aim of this study was to assess the role of sensoryweight. The modulation of the EMG amplitude from the SOL and information related to lower-extremity weight bearing inMG, both across steps and within a step, was more closely associ- modulating the efferent motor patterns of SCI subjects whenated with limb peak load than muscle-tendon stretch or the velocity provided with body weight support during manually assistedof muscle-tendon stretch. Thus stretch reﬂexes were not the sole stepping on a treadmill. The effect on motor pool output ofsource of the phasic EMG activity in ﬂexors and extensors during varying the load on the lower limbs during stepping wasmanually assisted stepping in SCI subjects. The EMG amplitude compared among SCI subjects who had minimal or no de-within a step was highly dependent on the phase of the step cycle regardless of level of load. These data suggest that level of loading tectable sensorimotor function below the level of lesion and on the lower limbs provides cues that enable the human lumbosa- neurally intact subjects. cral spinal cord to modulate efferent output in a manner that may facilitate the generation of stepping. These data provide a rationale METHODSfor gait rehabilitation strategies that utilize the level of load-bearing stepping to enhance the locomotor capability of SCI subjects. Subject population Two nondisabled (ND) and four chronic SCI subjects were studied. SCI subjects were classiﬁed with the use of the AmericanINTRODUCTION Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale, which catego- In the absence of supraspinal input, the adult cat spinal rizes individuals by their sensorimotor function below the level of lesion and designates a cumulative motor score (Ditunno et al.cord can generate efferent motor patterns that enable inde- 1994) (Table 1). In brief, ASIA classiﬁes individuals as follows:pendent stepping (Barbeau and Rossignol 1987; Lovely et A, no sensory or motor function below the lesion including theal. 1986). The oscillating neural circuitry responsible for sacral segments S 4 –S5 ; B, sensory but not motor function is pre-this task (Grillner and Zangger 1979) is highly dependent served below the neurological level; and C, motor function is pre-on peripheral modalities associated with stepping such as served below the neurological level but there is no active movementweight bearing and joint position (de Guzman et al. 1991; against gravity. SCI subjects in this study could not voluntarilyForssberg 1979; Grillner and Dubuc 1988; Lovely et al. stand or step over ground. Their injuries were at the thoracic level1990). The neural pathways in the lumbosacral spinal cord (Table 1) and a result of traumatic injury ( SCI-A1, SCI-A2, and of the cat respond to sensory information speciﬁcally associ- SCI-B1) or ischemia ( SCI-C1). Sensory evoked potentials were ated with locomotion to generate the efferent motor patterns recorded from the popliteal fossa, lumbar spine, and scalp (vertex positive peak) with the use of unilateral and bilateral posterior tibialnecessary to execute stepping (Edgerton et al. 1996). 7970022-3077/97 $5.00 Copyright q 1997 The American Physiological Society J290-6/ 9k0c$$fe11 09-04-97 20:28:13 neupal LP-Neurophys Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. HARKEMA, HURLEY, PATEL, REQUEJO, DOBKIN, AND EDGERTON798 TABLE 1. Clinical characteristics of SCI subjects ASIA Age, Weight, Postinjury, Injury Subject yr kg yr Level Grade Motor score SEP SCI-A1 39 74 2 T 7 A 0 Absent SCI-A2 39 68 11 T 9 A 0 Absent SCI-C1 43 96 2 T 8 CR Å 8, L Å 0 Present SCI-B1 59 68 2 T 4 B 0 Present SCI, spinal-cord-injured; ASIA, American Spinal Injury Association; SEP, somatosensory evoked potential; R, right; L, left. nerve electrical stimulation (Table 1). No response conﬁrmed the Limb load sensor calibration absence of detectable supraspinal conductivity to the lower limbs All sensors were dynamically calibrated (Carollo et al. 1993)in the ASIA A subjects. Subjects took no medications during these with the use of a force platform (Kistler, Amherst, NY), with NDstudies. Informed consent was obtained from each subject and the individuals matched by body weight and shoe size to SCI subjects.experiments were approved by the University of California at Los Calibrations from ND persons were used for all SCI subjects be-Angeles Human Subjects Protection Committee. cause they were not capable of over-ground walking. The force signal from the sensors was compared with the signal from a force plate recorded simultaneously during a step for each subject. TheExperimental procedures peak forces (maximum amplitude during contact) and mean forces (average of the amplitude during contact) from the pressure sensorsSoleus (SOL), medial gastrocnemius (MG), and tibialis anterior and the force plate from several steps were compared for each(TA) EMG activity, ankle and knee joint angles, level of body subject. A signiﬁcant ( Põ 0.05), positive linear relationship wasweight support, and amount of lower limb loading were measured observed for both the peak ( yÅ 0.98x0 10, rÅ 0.99) and meanduring stepping on a treadmill. All subjects wore a harness con- forces (yÅ 1.0x0 46, rÅ 0.96) from the pressure sensors versusnected to an overhead motorized lift that allowed adjustment of the force plate.lower limb loading. Body weight load (BWL) on the lower extrem- During each experiment, the load values determined by the sen-ities of ND subjects ranged from no limb loading (0%) to full sors were also compared with body weight support data simultane-loading (100%). Loading of SCI subjects ranged from no limb ously acquired by the force transducer attached to the suspensionloading to the maximum loading level at which knee ﬂexion during apparatus. The numerical sum of the loading (sum of the forcestance could be avoided (50–80% BWL). The different loads used from the left and right sensors) and unloading (force from thefor each sequence of steps were randomly ordered. SCI subjects force transducer) closely approximated the subject’s body weight,were assisted as necessary during stepping. Trainers held each leg verifying the accuracy of the load measurements during steppingdistal to the patella to assist with knee extension during stance and on the treadmill. Mean values from the sum of the force from thedistal to the ankle to assist with swing and foot placement. A third sensors from both limbs and force transducer signals during 20 sperson stabilized the pelvis. ND subjects stepped unassisted. of stepping at each load condition were compared. This analysisEMG activity was recorded with the use of surface electrodes. was completed for all loading conditions for each subject. ForBipolar surface EMG electrodes were placed on the following all subjects, linear regression demonstrated an inverse relationshipmuscles bilaterally: SOL, distal to the gastrocnemius muscle belly (slope of 00.92 { 0.15, mean { SE) between mean unloadingand medial to the Achilles tendon; MG, below the popliteal crease; and loading and the intercepts closely corresponded to the individu-and TA, below the tibial tuberosity and lateral to the tibial crest. al’s body weight.Knee and ankle angles were measured by electrogoniometers; foot contact was detected with the use of 2.5 cm 2 pressure-sensitive switches (footswitch) placed on the heel, two metatarsals (1st and Data analyses 5th), and toe; and body weight support was measured by a force Data from Ç800 steps from the six subjects were analyzed.transducer attached to the suspension apparatus. Data reduction was performed with the use of Labview (National Instruments, Austin, TX) customized by our laboratory. The EMG data were rectiﬁed and high-pass ﬁltered at 32 Hz. Force signalsData acquisition from the pressure sensors were interpolated from 50 Hz to 1 kHz and synchronized with EMG signals. Onset of EMG bursts wasA 24-channel hard-wired system (Konigsberg Instruments, Pasa- dena, CA) was used to acquire EMG, electrogoniometer, deﬁned as the time when the signal amplitude remained above the threshold (mean of the baseline / 3 SD) for 50 ms. The end offootswitch, and force transducer signals. EMG data from the SOL, MG, and TA were sampled from 0.1 to 1 kHz and AC coupled the EMG burst was deﬁned by the time when the signal amplitude remained below the threshold level for 150 ms. Bursts were ana-into a differential ampliﬁer. The signals were pulse-interval modu- lated to a ﬁberoptic transmitter and relayed to decoding electronics. lyzed independent of where they occurred in the step cycle; that is, the complete EMG burst in each step was quantiﬁed regardlessAll analog signals were digitally sampled at 1 kHz (National Instru- ments, Austin, TX). of whether it was synchronized with the onset and termination of loading or muscle stretch. Mean EMG amplitude was calculatedLimb load was measured for 20 s during each load condition by shoe insert pressure sensors with the use of a computerized by dividing the sum of the amplitudes of each burst by the burst duration. For each step, limb peak load was determined by sub-measurement device (TEKSCAN, Boston, MA) that acquires plan- tar forces during stepping. The pressure sensors contained a grid tracting the minimum force signal from the maximum. Percent BWL was calculated by dividing the limb peak load by bodyof 960 pressure-sensing cells (0.252 cm each) consisting of two perpendicular layers of conductive ink, each photolithographed weight. Mean EMG amplitude versus limb peak load was plotted for the SOL, MG, and TA muscles of each subject.with parallel traces on a mylar substrate. The analog signal was digitized at a frequency of 50 Hz by electronics located in a cuff Muscle-tendon length was calculated as percent shank length on the basis of goniometer measurements and the regression equationsunit placed above the lateral malleolus. J290-6/ 9k0c$$fe11 09-04-97 20:28:13 neupal LP-Neurophys Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. NEUROMUSCULAR PLASTICITY IN SPINAL CORD INJURY 799 derived by Hawkins and Hull (1990). The rate of change of mus- cle-tendon length (referred to as velocity of muscle-tendon length change) was determined by the derivation of the calculated muscle- tendon length curves. The relationship between mean EMG activity and increases in muscle-tendon length (muscle-tendon stretch) were compared in two ways. First, the mean EMG activity (as described above) was plotted versus the maximum muscle-tendon stretch of each step cycle, independent of whether the EMG activity of the muscle was synchronized with the muscle-tendon stretch. The mean EMG activity was also plotted versus the velocity of muscle-tendon stretch. Second, to assess the immediate response of the EMG activity to muscle-tendon stretch, the mean EMG activity was determined solely during the period of the muscle- tendon stretch incorporating a delay for signal conduction velocity (70 ms). The mean EMG activity during this period was plotted versus muscle-tendon stretch and velocity of muscle-tendon stretch. Waveforms of EMG activity (low-pass ﬁltered at 5 Hz), muscle- tendon length, velocity of muscle-tendon length change, and limb load were generated from eight consecutive steps per BWL condi- tion to investigate relationships within a step cycle. In loaded con- ditions, a step cycle was taken from initial foot contact of one limb to the following initial foot contact of the same limb. For trials with no limb loading, step cycles were taken from two consecutive points of maximum dorsiﬂexion determined by ankle goniometer signals. This ankle position during no loading closely approximated the ankle angle at initial contact during loaded stepping. For step cycle averaging, the eight step cycles were normalized to the mean cycle duration, averaged, and expressed as percent of the step cycle duration. Statistics The correlation among EMG mean amplitude and each variable (peak load, muscle-tendon stretch, and velocity of muscle-tendon stretch) were evaluated by regression analysis during a step cycle and during EMG activity. In most cases, quadratic ( y Å ax2 / bx/ c/ error) regressions were reported for each muscle (SOL, MG, and TA) because they provided substantially higher correla- tion coefﬁcients (thus explaining more of the variability) and lower P values than linear ( yÅ ax/ c/ error) regressions (Tables 3 and 4). When there was a nonsigniﬁcant quadratic term and a signiﬁcant linear term, the linear regression was reported. Addition- ally, stepwise regression (minimum tolerance for entry into modelÅ 0.010, a to enter Å 0.150, a to remove Å 0.150) of all variables per muscle was performed. RESULTS FIG. 1. Representative electromyographic (EMG) activity ( mV; recti- ﬁed, high-pass ﬁltered at 32 Hz) from soleus (SOL), medial gastrocnemiusMotor pool activity during stepping on a treadmill with (MG), and tibialis anterior (TA); knee and ankle angles ( 7); limb loadpartial body weight support (N); body weight support (BWS, N); and foot contact (FS) during stepping at a treadmill speed of 0.45 m/s. Data from a nondisabled (ND) subjectEMG bursts of the primary ankle muscles were synchro- (ND-1) and 2 spinal-cord-injured (SCI) subjects ( SCI-C1 and SCI-A2) arenized with the stepping cadence in all subjects during shown. The ND subject stepped independently and SCI subjects stepped weight-bearing stepping with body weight support, as shown with assistance. Dashed lines: transition between stance and swing phases of a step cycle as detected by the footswitches.by representative data from one ND and two SCI subjects (ND-1, SCI-C1, and SCI-A2; Fig. 1). The SOL and MG were active during stance (as displayed by load sensors and Overall knee and ankle dynamics were similar among SCI footswitches) in all subjects. The MG consistently preceded subjects that were assisted and the unassisted ND subjects the onset of loading as well as the initiation of the SOL during stepping. burst in SCI-A2. The TA was active primarily during swing in both ND-1 and SCI-C1, whereas cocontraction with plan- SOL EMG response to limb loadtarﬂexors was observed in SCI-A2. Cocontraction of dorsi- ﬂexors with plantarﬂexors was also observed in both SCI- SOL EMG mean amplitudes were modulated by limb peak load in all subjects. The EMG mean amplitudes of each stepB1 and SCI-A1 (not shown). Clonic EMG activity (charac- terized by high amplitude and low frequency) as detected of each subject for the range of loads studied are shown in Fig. 2. Each point represents the average of the SOL EMGin SCI-C1 was often seen in the bursts of SCI subjects. J290-6/ 9k0c$$fe11 09-04-97 20:28:13 neupal LP-Neurophys Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. HARKEMA, HURLEY, PATEL, REQUEJO, DOBKIN, AND EDGERTON800 FIG. 2. Averaged SOL EMG mean amplitude per burst ( mV; rectiﬁed, high-pass ﬁltered at 32 Hz) vs. limb peak load [% body weight load (BWL)] for each subject. Each point represents the average of SOL EMG amplitudes (means { SE) within a 10% interval of the BWL range (i.e., 0–10%, 10–20%, etc.). Data from the right limb ( s ) and left limb ( ●)o f each subject are shown separately. Data were not available for every BWL interval. The regression line was based on individual data points from each step cycle and drawn for each muscle when there was a signiﬁcant relationship ( Põ 0.05; see Table 2 for correlation ratios). mean amplitude of 5–30 steps within a 10% BWL range. SOL EMG responses to muscle-tendon length changes Regression lines were determined from single steps as plot- The relationships among SOL EMG mean amplitudes,ted in Fig. 3 (Table 2). A signiﬁcant relationship between level of load, and changes in muscle-tendon stretch wereSOL EMG mean amplitude and limb peak load was detected examined to determine whether limb loading affected thein 11 of 11 muscles studied. The responsiveness to loading range of joint motion. These altered kinematics could changewas most consistent at loads ofõ40–50% BWL. The magni- muscle-tendon stretch during gait, which could modulatetude of the effects and the shapes of the regression lines EMG activity through reﬂex pathways. The relationshipsdiffered among subjects and even between limbs within among SOL EMG mean amplitude, limb peak load, muscle-some subjects (Fig. 2, Table 2). The statistical model of tendon stretch, and velocity of muscle-tendon stretch perbest ﬁt between SOL EMG mean amplitude and limb peak step were examined. Representative data are shown for oneload was curvilinear in 10 of 11 muscles. In one muscle subject from each functional class (Fig. 3, A–C, E, G–I, K,there was no signiﬁcant curvilinear relationship but a sig- M