fncel-13-00452 October 4, 2019 Time: 18:54 # 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 09 October 2019 doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00452 Edited by: Claire Francesca Meehan, University of Copenhagen, Denmark Reviewed by: Simon Arthur Sharples, University of St Andrews, United Kingdom Hans Hultborn, University of Copenhagen, Denmark *Correspondence: Kimberly J. Dougherty kjd86@drexel.edu Specialty section: This article was submitted to Cellular Neurophysiology, a section of the journal Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience Received: 06 August 2019 Accepted: 20 September 2019 Published: 09 October 2019 Citation: Li EZ, Garcia-Ramirez DL and Dougherty KJ (2019) Flexor and Extensor Ankle Afferents Broadly Innervate Locomotor Spinal Shox2 Neurons and Induce Similar Effects in Neonatal Mice. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13:452. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00452 Flexor and Extensor Ankle Afferents Broadly Innervate Locomotor Spinal Shox2 Neurons and Induce Similar Effects in Neonatal Mice Erik Z. Li, D. Leonardo Garcia-Ramirez and Kimberly J. Dougherty * Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States Central pattern generators (CPGs) in the thoracolumbar spinal cord generate the basic hindlimb locomotor pattern. The locomotor CPG integrates descending commands and sensory information from the periphery to activate, modulate and halt the rhythmic program. General CPG function and response to sensory perturbations are well described in cat and rat models. In mouse, roles for many genetically identiﬁed spinal interneurons have been inferred from locomotor alterations following population deletion or modulation. However, the organization of afferent input to speciﬁc genetically identiﬁed populations of spinal CPG interneurons in mouse remains comparatively less resolved. Here, we focused on a population of CPG neurons marked by the transcription factor Shox2. To directly test integration of afferent signaling by Shox2 neurons, sensory afferents were stimulated during patch clamp recordings of Shox2 neurons in isolated spinal cord preparations from neonatal mice. Shox2 neurons broadly displayed afferent- evoked currents at multiple segmental levels, particularly from caudal dorsal roots innervating distal hindlimb joints. As dorsal root stimulation may activate both ﬂexor- and extensor-related afferents, preparations preserving peripheral nerves were used to provide more speciﬁc activation of ankle afferents. We found that both ﬂexor- and extensor-related afferent stimulation were likely to evoke similar currents in a given Shox2 neuron, as assessed by response polarity, latency, duration and amplitude. It has been proposed that Shox2 neurons can be divided into neurons which contribute to rhythm generation and neurons that are premotor by the absence and presence of the V2a marker Chx10, respectively. Response to afferent stimulation did not differ based on Chx10 expression. Although currents evoked in response to ﬂexor and extensor afferent activation did not follow expected functional antagonism, they were consistent with the observation that stimulation of ﬂexor- and extensor-related afferents both reset the phase of ongoing ﬁctive locomotion to ﬂexion in neonatal mice. Together, the data suggest that Shox2 neurons are interposed in multiple sensory pathways and low threshold proprioceptive input reinforces sensory perturbation of ongoing locomotion by similarly activating or inhibiting both the rhythm and patterning layers of the CPG. Keywords: locomotion, central pattern generator, spinal cord, interneuron, sensory input Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 October 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 452 fncel-13-00452 October 4, 2019 Time: 18:54 # 2 Li et al. Afferent Input to Shox2 Neurons INTRODUCTION Locomotion is an essential part of the behavioral repertoire of many animals for seeking resources or escaping danger and is frequently accomplished by means of a repetitive motor pattern. In humans and other vertebrates, neural circuits in the spinal cord known as locomotor central pattern generators (CPGs) are capable of generating this basic motor pattern. In humans, these circuits are localized in the thoracolumbar spinal cord and an analogous region exists for hindlimb locomotion in quadrupedal animals such as cats and rodents. Although CPG circuits can independently generate the basic rhythm and alternating motor pattern, descending control from supraspinal structures and ascending sensory inputs from proprioceptors and cutaneous aﬀerents are normally integrated to enable skilled and automated movements (Goulding, 2009; Kiehn, 2016). Understanding CPG circuit organization and sensory modulation of the circuit may be essential to develop strategies for locomotor recovery in several pathologies including spinal cord injury, stroke and multiple sclerosis. Sensory aﬀerents play an important role in the generation and modulation of context-appropriate shifts in locomotor stance/swing timing and muscle force. Experiments in cats and rats have allowed very ﬁne partitioning of sensorimotor function during locomotion and resulted in signiﬁcant advances in understanding CPG control (McCrea, 2001; Rossignol et al., 2006). For example, spinally transected cats can adapt locomotor frequency to match treadmill speed and this behavior is abolished following dorsal root transection (Andersson et al., 1978; Grillner and Rossignol, 1978). In a similar fashion, sinusoidal movements of the hip can entrain ongoing locomotor-like nerve outputs in an animal model treated with a neuromuscular blocker (Andersson and Grillner, 1983). Throughout the stance phase, input from ankle extensors also provide speed-dependent enhancement of force generation in hindlimb extensor muscles (Duysens and Pearson, 1980; Conway et al., 1987; Gossard et al., 1994; Guertin et al., 1995; Mayer et al., 2018). In addition to relatively long-lasting sensory inputs, locomotor generation is also sensitive to acute sensory signals. Brief electrical stimulation of ankle extensors in the cat terminates ongoing ﬂexor activity and initiates extensor activity (Conway et al., 1987). In the normal transition of stance to swing, hip angle at swing onset is relatively constant across a range of locomotor tasks (Lam and Pearson, 2001; McVea et al., 2005). Furthermore, acute stretch of hindlimb ﬂexor muscles at the hip and ankle can also initiate a new ﬂexor phase (Perreault et al., 1995; Hiebert et al., 1996; Stecina et al., 2005). Additionally, activation of the foot cutaneous aﬀerents evokes a stumbling corrective response to avoid an obstacle (Prochazka et al., 1978; Wand et al., 1980; Mayer and Akay, 2018). The ability of sensory signals to entrain and perturb locomotion strongly implies that sensory aﬀerents have access to CPG circuit elements, likely through multiple distinct and possibly overlapping pathways. In the cat and rat models, these eﬀects are well established, but it has been diﬃcult to determine the CPG neuronal elements which receive and integrate sensory information, partly because no clear anatomic nuclei can reliably identify such interneurons. Similarly, computational models based on the cat and rat experimental results are limited in the data available to directly identify classes of spinal neurons comprising the CPG (Brown, 1911; Pearson and Duysens, 1976; Grillner, 1981; McCrea, 2001; Rybak et al., 2006a,b; Guertin, 2009). Sensory modulation of locomotor activity is also known to occur in the mouse, but the eﬀects are less fully described (Hinckley et al., 2010; Akay et al., 2014; Takeoka et al., 2014). However, by leveraging transgenic tools available in the mouse model, many neuronal populations with locomotor functions have been identiﬁed and a putative circuit architecture has been proposed (for review see Rybak et al., 2015). Data from the cat and rat and from the mouse are therefore complementary in that sensory eﬀects are well-described in the cat and rat but circuit elements are diﬃcult to identify, and vice-versa in the mouse. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms by which sensory information is conveyed to CPG neurons in the mouse will not only provide novel information regarding CPG circuit organization and connectivity, but will also provide an important link between these two bodies of literature. Sensory perturbations which have strong locomotor eﬀects are likely to be mediated by neurons which participate in the generation of locomotor rhythm. Although a marker which can reliably and speciﬁcally label all such neurons remains elusive, speciﬁc genetically identiﬁed populations of neurons are thought to comprise subsets of the rhythm-generating (RG) kernel (Brownstone and Wilson, 2008; Dougherty and Ha, 2019). Here, we focus on neurons identiﬁed by the transcription factor Shox2, a subset of which have been proposed to play a role in locomotor rhythm generation (Dougherty et al., 2013). The goals of this study were to determine how proprioceptive aﬀerent information reaches Shox2 neurons and aﬀects ﬁctive locomotion in mouse. We demonstrate that Shox2 neurons receive broad innervation from sensory aﬀerents in the quiescent state, likely mediated by a minimally disynaptic pathway. Based on eﬀects seen in the cat and rat, we hypothesized that low- threshold input from ankle extensor and ﬂexor aﬀerents would induce opposing eﬀects in Shox2 neurons. Instead, we found that most Shox2 neurons receive similar postsynaptic currents following both ankle extensor stimulation and ankle ﬂexor stimulation which were predominantly inhibitory and could be long duration. Shox2 neurons are known to overlap with the V2a population and more speciﬁc labeling of RG neurons can be accomplished by speciﬁcally targeting non-V2a Shox2 neurons (Shox2RG). The V2a Shox2 subpopulation (Shox2 PF) is thought to be enriched for downstream interneurons which recruit motor neurons, a function that has been referred to as pattern forming (PF) (Rybak et al., 2006a,b, 2015). Shox2 PF neurons which responded to ankle aﬀerent stimulation were preferentially situated in rostral lumbar segments, but the response patterns otherwise did not diﬀer between Shox2 RG and Shox2PF neurons. This corresponded with the ﬁnding that both ankle ﬂexor and extensor aﬀerent stimulation reset ongoing ﬁctive locomotion by activating ﬂexor motor pools. Taken together, this suggests that low threshold proprioceptive input may reach rhythm and Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 October 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 452 fncel-13-00452 October 4, 2019 Time: 18:54 # 3 Li et al. Afferent Input to Shox2 Neurons patterning layers similarly, thereby reinforcing the sensory eﬀect on locomotion at both levels. MATERIALS AND METHODS All experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Drexel University and followed the guidelines of the National Institutes of Health for laboratory animal welfare. Experiments were performed using Shox2::Cre (Dougherty et al., 2013); Rosa26-ﬂox-Stop-ﬂox- tdTomato (Ai9 from Jax Mice, #007909, Madisen et al., 2010) or in Shox2::Cre;Ai9;Chx10eGFP (also called Vsx2-eGFP , MMRRC, 011391-UCD, Gong et al., 2003) transgenic mice. Spinal Cord Preparations Spinal cords preparations were isolated from postnatal day (P)1 to P4 mice. Brieﬂy, mice were decapitated and eviscerated, after which the vertebral bodies were removed to expose the spinal cord. The spinal cord and attached dorsal root ganglia (DRG) were then removed in ice cold dissecting solution. Spinal cord preparations were isolated in a dissecting solution bubbled with 95% O 2/5% CO2 (carbogen) containing in mM: 111 NaCl, 3 KCl, 11 glucose, 25 NaHCO 3, 3.7 MgSO 4, 1.1 KH2PO 4, and 0.25 CaCl2. Peripheral Nerve Dissection In some experiments, the dissection was extended to include hindlimb peripheral nerves. Care was taken during removal of the vertebral bodies to avoid damaging spinal nerves. Hindlimb muscles were removed to expose the sciatic nerve and its branches, which were then dissected free. In mice, there is strain- speciﬁc variation in lumbar spinal cord anatomy (Rigaud et al., 2008). Spinal roots from the third and fourth lumbar levels are the primary contributions to the sciatic nerve in the mice used for this study. Accessing Shox2 Neurons In order to visualize Shox2 neurons for whole cell patch clamp, it was necessary to create a tissue window. To prevent compression of the cord, spinal meninges were ﬁrst carefully removed or split over incision sites. In experiments using a ventral horn- removed preparation, a section of ventral horn was removed (L2-S2) using a surgical microknife (5.0 mm cutting edge, 15.0 cutting angle, Fine Science Tools #10315-12) to gain visual access to spinal interneurons for patch clamp. For experiments using a hemisect preparation, a unilateral section of spinal cord (L2-S2) was removed. Following isolation, spinal cords were transferred to room temperature (RT) artiﬁcial cerebral spinal ﬂuid (ACSF) recording solution containing in mM: 111 NaCl, 3 KCl, 11 glucose, 25 NaHCO 3, 1.3 MgSO 4, 1.1 KH 2PO4, and 2.5 CaCl 2. Cords were incubated in carbogen-bubbled ACSF for a minimum of 30 min prior to recording. Preparations From Older Mice In subsets of some experiments, mice aged P5–P14 were used. Mice <P8 were dissected using the procedures described above. Mice P8 and older were ﬁrst anesthetized with isoﬂurane prior to decapitation and spinal cords were isolated using an alternative glycerol-based dissecting solution bubbled with carbogen and containing in mM: 3 KCl, 11 glucose, 25 NaHCO 3, 1.3 MgSO 4, 1.1 KH2PO4, 2.5 CaCl 2, 222 glycerol. Following isolation, these cords were incubated in carbogen-bubbled recording ACSF at 37◦C for 30 min and then allowed to equilibrate to RT for 30 min prior to recording. Electrophysiology Patch Clamp Shox2 neurons were recorded in ACSF and visually identiﬁed at 63× on an Olympus BX51WI microscope with LED illumination (X-Cite) by red ﬂuorescence (Semrock Brightline CY3-4040C). In cords from Shox2::cre;Ai9;Chx10eGFP mice, Shox2 neurons were further speciﬁed by the V2a-speciﬁc marker Chx10 into the Chx10-negative Shox2 RG or the Chx10-positive Shox2 PF based on green ﬂuorescence (Semrock Brightline FITC-3540C). Intracellular electrodes were pulled to 5–8 M  using a Sutter P- 1000 and ﬁlled with intracellular solution containing in mM: 128 K-gluconate, 10 HEPES, 0.0001 CaCl 2, 1 glucose, 4 NaCl, 5 ATP , and 0.3 GTP. Cells were recorded in whole-cell conﬁguration from the soma using a Multiclamp 700B and digitized at 10– 20 kHz with an Axon Digidata 1550A connected to a PC tower running Clampex. Afferent Stimulation and Spinal Root Recordings During recordings of Shox2 neurons, dorsal roots or peripheral nerves were stimulated with tight-ﬁtting glass suction electrodes to activate aﬀerent sensory pathways. Ventral roots were cut free proximal to the spinal nerve to prevent transmission of antidromic axon potentials in eﬀerent motor pathways. Dorsal root and peripheral nerves were stimulated using 50 µs square pulses with a 10 s interstimulus interval to reduce eﬀects of short-term synaptic plasticity. Pulse waveforms were generated by either an Axon Digidata 1550A or an AMPI Master-9 pulse stimulator connected to an optical stimulus isolator. In some experiments, aﬀerent volleys in dorsal roots or ventral root reﬂexes were also recorded. Signals were ampliﬁed 1000 × and bandpass ﬁltered from 10 Hz to 1 kHz using a model MA 102 ampliﬁer (custom built in the workshop of the Zoological Institute, University of Cologne, Germany), then digitized at 100 kHz with an Axon Digidata 1550A connected to a PC. Where reported, stimulus threshold (1× T) for aﬀerent volley or ventral root reﬂex was deﬁned as the minimum current respectively necessary to reliably evoke dorsal root or ventral root responses in 10/10 trials. Postsynaptic Current Analysis Post-stimulation currents recorded in Shox2 neurons were categorized as stimulation-evoked if the response was present in at least 8 out of 10 stimulation trials. Current components were identiﬁed as inhibitory or excitatory based on reversal potential (inhibitory <−35 mV , excitatory>−5 mV). Current properties including latency, peak amplitude and duration were measured using Clampﬁt 10 (Molecular Devices). Latency was measured as Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 October 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 452 fncel-13-00452 October 4, 2019 Time: 18:54 # 4 Li et al. Afferent Input to Shox2 Neurons the diﬀerence between the time that the current exceeded pre- stimulus baseline levels and the time of stimulation. Jitter was deﬁned as the standard deviation in the latency of the earliest current components. Amplitude is reported and analyzed as absolute value. Where data is presented using box and whisker plots, the boxplot labels median, 1st quartile and 3rd quartile, with whiskers extending to 1.5× the interquartile range beyond the 1st and 3rd quartiles. Measurement of Cell Location Many genetically labeled interneuron populations show diﬀerences in function or connectivity that is dependent on cellular position. In this study, cellular position was measured and reported as segmental level, mediolateral position and dorsoventral position. Distances were measured from images captured at 10 × immediately following cell recordings and before removing the patch electrode. These measurements were then normalized according to the following procedures. The center point of the dorsal root at the entry zone is designated as segment number and Shox2 segmental level is normalized such that the distance between each dorsal root entry zone center point is 1. Mediolateral position is reported as the distance between the cell and the midsagittal plane divided by distance between the lateral tissue border and the midsagittal plane, resulting in a normalized value from 0 (medial) to 1 (lateral). Similarly, dorsoventral position is reported as the distance between the cell and the dorsal tissue border divided by the distance between the dorsal and ventral tissue borders, resulting in a normalized value from 0 (dorsal) to 1 (ventral). Locomotor Experiments Spinal cords were prepared from P1–P3 mice with attached peripheral nerves. Fictive locomotion was evoked with 7 µM N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and 8 µM serotonin (5-HT). Cords were allowed to equilibrate with the locomotor cocktail for at least 15 min prior to recording. Flexor- and extensor-related locomotor activity were respectively recorded from L1 and L4 ventral roots using tight-ﬁtting glass suction electrodes and digitized at 10 kHz. Locomotor burst envelopes were generated by rectifying and low-pass ﬁltering at 0.25–0.55 Hz. Locally- weighted scatterplot smoothing (LOWESS) with a 3–60 s window was used to generate a locally adaptive signal threshold for burst onset and oﬀset. For perturbation experiments, trains of electrical stimulation (4–6 pulses, 50 µs pulse duration, 20 Hz) were delivered to peripheral nerves in 100 s intervals. In these preparations, ventral roots were transected proximal to the spinal nerve to prevent antidromic transmission along motor ﬁbers. Statistical T ests and Reporting Univariate descriptive statistics were reported as mean± standard deviation and range unless otherwise speciﬁed. Statistical tests were performed using the R 3.6.0 software package with a criterion α < 0.05 for signiﬁcance. All statistical tests were performed on raw values even when plotted on log-axes for visualization. Categorical data was analyzed using Chi-squared tests, with Y ate’s continuity correction used for 2× 2 contingency tables. For comparisons between groups of continuous variables, normality was ﬁrst tested using the Shapiro–Wilk test and homogeneity of variances (homoscedasticity) was tested using the Fligner-Killeen test of homogeneity of va