Mechanics of Slope Walking in the Cat: Quantiﬁcation of Muscle Load, Length Change, and Ankle Extensor EMG Patterns Robert J. Gregor, D. Webb Smith, and Boris I. Prilutsky Center for Human Movement Studies, School of Applied Physiology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia Submitted 17 December 2004; accepted in ﬁnal form 18 September 2005 Gregor, Robert J., D. Webb Smith, and Boris I. Prilutsky. Mechanics of slope walking in the cat: quantiﬁcation of muscle load, length change, and ankle extensor EMG patterns. J Neuro- physiol 95: 1397–1409, 2006. First published October 5, 2005; doi:10.1152/jn.01300.2004. Unexpected changes in ﬂexor– exten- sor muscle activation synergies during slope walking in the cat have been explained previously by 1) a reorganization of circuitry in the central pattern generator or 2) altered muscle and cutaneous afferent inputs to motoneurons that modulate their activity. The aim of this study was to quantify muscle length changes, muscle loads, and ground reaction forces during downslope, level, and upslope walking in the cat. These mechanical variables are related to feedback from muscle length and force, and paw pad cutaneous afferents, and differences in these variables between the slope walking conditions could provide additional insight into possible mechanisms of the muscle control. Kinematics, ground reaction forces, and EMG were recorded while cats walked on a walkway in three conditions: downslope ( /H1100226.6 deg), level (0 deg), and upslope (26.6 deg). The resultant joint moments were calculated using inverse dynamics analysis; length and velocity of major hindlimb muscle-tendon units (MTUs) were calculated using a geometric model and calculated joint angles. It was found that during stance in downslope walking, the MTU stretch of ankle and knee extensors and MTU peak stretch velocities of ankle extensors were signiﬁcantly greater than those in level or upslope conditions, whereas forces applied to the paw pad and peaks of ankle and hip extensor moments were signiﬁcantly smaller. The opposite was true for upslope walking. It was suggested that these differences between upslope and downslope walking might affect motion- dependent feedback, resulting in muscle activity changes recorded here or reported in the literature. INTRODUCTION There is general consensus in the literature that a central pattern generator (CPG) located in the spinal cord is capable of producing a basic rhythmic pattern of alternating ﬂexor (swing- related) and extensor (stance-related) muscle activity during locomotion (Brown 1914; Grillner 1981; Orlovsky et al. 1999; Rossignol 1996). The structure and function of this generator, however, have been the subject of extensive debate considering that, although the CPG can generate locomotor activity pat- terns in muscle nerves independently (as in ﬁctive locomotion), movement-related input from muscle, skin, and joint afferents can strongly inﬂuence the magnitude, timing, and pattern of muscle activity and the duration of stance and swing phases during locomotion (Bouyer and Rossignol 2003; McCrea 1998; Pearson et al. 1998). Recent results reported by Smith and colleagues (1998b) on muscle activity patterns during downslope walking demon- strated—surprisingly—that activity of the one-joint hip exten- sors (i.e., the anterior biceps femoris and anterior semimem- branosus), although typical for locomotion on level ground, was not present during the stance phase of gait, whereas the one-joint hip ﬂexor (i.e., the iliopsoas) was active instead. These observations could not be explained by existing models of the CPG and subsequently led Smith et al. (1998b; their Fig. 12) to propose modiﬁcations to the “unit burst” model of the CPG (Grillner 1981) to account for these new ﬁndings. Al- though this explanation accounts for the modiﬁcations in mus- cle synergies between up- and downslope walking, it has difﬁculty explaining differences in the magnitude and timing of EMG activity of major hind limb muscles between these slope conditions (Pearson 2000). As suggested by Pearson (2000) modiﬁcations of sensory input arising from changes in me- chanical settings, such as limb posture and orientation and external load during slope walking, could also affect the intensity and timing of muscle activity either bypassing the CPG or/and through modiﬁcation of its networks. Indeed during slope walking one might expect a redistribu- tion of ground reaction forces between the fore- and hindlimbs because of the changes reported in body orientation with respect to gravitational force (Smith et al. 1998a,b). For exam- ple, during downslope walking, the hindlimbs appear to be loaded less when compared with level or upslope walking and thus cutaneous output from the plantar surface of the paw and muscle force-dependent activation of group Ib afferents from hindlimb extensor muscles might be reduced. This redistribu- tion of load between forelimbs and hindlimbs also might subsequently modify the activity of extensors and ﬂexors (Bouyer and Rossignol 2003; Conway et al. 1987; Gorassini et al. 1994; Gossard et al. 1994; Guertin et al. 1995; McCrea et al. 1995; Pearson and Collins 1993). It is further expected that muscle length– dependent feedback signals from groups Ia and II afferents are enhanced in downslope walking and reduced in upslope walking compared with level locomotion (Abelew et al. 2000; Gregor et al. 2001), which could also affect the activity of hindlimb muscles (e.g., Eccles et al. 1957, 1958). Although the differences in the mechanical conditions between slope and level walking and their potential effects on shaping muscle activity patterns appear important and have been presented sporadically in the literature (Abelew et al. 2000; Carlson-Kuhta et al. 1998; Gregor et al. 1999, 2001; Kaya et al. 2003; Pierotti et al. 1989; Smith et al. 1998b), muscle length, ground reaction Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: R. J. Gregor, Chair, School of Applied Physiology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0356 (E-mail: robert.gregor@ap.gatech.edu). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 95: 1397–1409, 2006. First published October 5, 2005; doi:10.1152/jn.01300.2004. 13970022-3077/06 $8.00 Copyright © 2006 The American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. forces, and loads on the muscles have not been quantiﬁed for slope walking. This information can help determine the extent to which afferent signals might be modiﬁed in this type of locomo- tion and help explain the dramatic changes previously reported in the ﬂexor/extensor synergy. The aim of this study was to quantify differences in muscle length changes, ground reaction forces, and muscle loads between level, downslope, and upslope walking in the cat. METHODS Procedures Five adult cats ( felis domesticus) were selected on the basis of size (average 3.8 kg) and response to food reward. All cats were cared for in accordance with the American Physiological Society Animal Care Guidelines. Before data collection, both hindlimbs were shaved and marked with nontoxic reﬂective markers placed on the iliac crest, greater trochanter, approximate knee joint center, lateral malleolus, base of the ﬁfth phalanx, and the distal end of the ﬁfth digit. Each cat was trained to walk within a Plexiglas-enclosed walkway with ground contact kinetics [ground reaction force (GRF)], center of pressure components, and joint position data collected for all level and slope walking trials according to the procedures outlined by Fowler et al. (1993). The entire walkway surface (2.5 /H110030.4 m) was covered with a thin, nonslip mat (the mat over each force platform in the center of the walkway was isolated from the remainder of the walkway) and a trial was considered acceptable if the cat walked with an uninter- rupted gait at constant speed through the walkway, and the hindlimb under study made contact with either one of the two force platforms (Bertec) independent of the surrounding surface. Conﬁrmation of these acceptable conditions was made using one of two motion capture systems (Peak Performance Technology and Vicon) that recorded coordinates of the body markers at 120 ﬁeld/s. Force and center of pressure data were sampled at 360 Hz. Food and affection were used to encourage each cat to walk on a level surface (0%) and two different slope conditions, i.e., /H1100650% ( /H1100626.6 deg). Three of the ﬁve cats were surgically implanted with EMG elec- trodes. EMG ﬁne-wire electrodes (Teﬂon-insulated multistrand, 100 /H9262m diameter, Cooner Wire, Chatsworth, CA) were passed subcuta- neously from a head-mounted multipin connector and implanted chronically in soleus (SO), lateral gastrocnemius (LG), medial gas- trocnemius (MG), and/or plantaris (P) muscles. One cat had electrodes implanted in the SO and MG muscles in the left hindlimb; a second cat had electrodes implanted in the SO and LG muscles, bilaterally; and a third cat had electrodes implanted in the SO, MG, LG, and P in the right hindlimb. Each channel of EMG was sampled at a rate of 3,000 Hz and processed in a bandwidth between 30 and 1,000 Hz (3 dB). EMG signals were synchronized to the force plate and motion capture data with a common pulse. Data analyses HINDLIMB KINEMATICS. A trial consisted of four to ﬁve step cycles but only the step cycle in which the cat hindlimb independently contacted the force plate was used in both the kinematic and inverse dynamics analyses (see following text). A total of 96 step cycles, one from each of 96 trials, was used in these analyses. The ﬁrst paw liftoff (PO) was deﬁned kinematically from motion capture data, whereas paw contact (PC) and the second paw liftoff were identiﬁed for each trial using the GRF components. These time points were subsequently used to deﬁne a complete step cycle and its swing and stance phases. Cycle periods were measured from successive paw liftoffs; stance phase duration was mea- sured from PC to PO and expressed as a percentage of the step cycle. Because walking speed affects the magnitude and proﬁle of gait, kine- matic and kinetic pattern analyses were limited, a priori, to trials in which the stance duration, which is related to speed (e.g., Goslow et al. 1973), was between 450 and 600 ms. Hindlimb kinematics for the ﬁve-segment two-dimensional (2D) model, including the pelvis, thigh, leg, tarsals, and digits, were calculated from the segment endpoint markers mentioned above. Digitized coordinates were smoothed using a fourth-order, zero-lag Butterworth ﬁlter with the cutoff frequency based on 98.5% of the signal power. Knee joint position was extrapolated from the hip and ankle coordinates using thigh and shank segment lengths (Fowler et al. 1993; Goslow et al. 1973) obtained in postmortem measurements. (The recorded knee marker coordinates were not used for the kine- matic analysis but used only for constructing initial stick ﬁgures to verify completeness of the recordings.) Linear and angular velocities and accelerations were calculated for each segment using the method of ﬁnite differences. DETERMINATION OF MUSCLE-TENDON UNIT LENGTH AND VELOCITY. Muscle-tendon unit (MTU) lengths were calculated for nine muscles in the cat hindlimb for each of the 96 step cycles described earlier following the model presented by Goslow et al. (1973). In this geometric model, each muscle is represented as a straight line con- necting the points of muscle attachment to the bone. The mean distances from the joint centers to the corresponding muscle origins and insertions were obtained by Goslow et al. (1973) in 28 cats (their Table 2) and used in this study. After calculating MTU lengths, MTU velocities were computed using the method of ﬁnite differences. The amount of MTU lengthening during the yield phase of stance (from PC to the peak stretch) as well as the peaks of MTU stretch velocities were obtained for further statistical analysis. The muscles included in this analysis were the SO, MG, LG/P, iliopsoas (IP), rectus femoris (RF), vastus lateralis (VL), semimembranosus anterior (SMA), biceps femoris posterior (BFP), and the semitendinosus (ST). The behavior of the anterior biceps femoris (ABF) muscle, one-joint hip extensor, was discussed extensively by Smith et al. (1998b) but the ABF muscle is not presented in the model proposed by Goslow et al. (1973) used in our analysis of muscle stretch. The Goslow model includes another one-joint hip extensor, SMA. Thus we estimated MTU stretch of one-joint hip extensors using the SMA muscle assuming the location of the SMA and ABF with respect to the hip joint in the sagittal plane was similar. EXTERNAL FORCES APPLIED TO THE HINDLIMB. Recorded ground reaction forces were smoothed using a fourth-order, zero-lag Butter- worth ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 25 Hz. The normal (orthogonal to the walkway surface) and anterior–posterior (parallel to the walk- way surface) components of the ground reaction force vector recorded during each trial were used to calculate the magnitude of the resultant force vector during the stance phase. The peaks of the resultant vector and the normal component and the negative and positive peaks of the anterior–posterior component were selected for further statistical analysis. CALCULATION OF JOINT MOMENTS. Joint moments of force repre- sent the quantitative measure of the net action of the agonist and antagonist muscles at a joint assuming that the moment contributions of other tissues (such as ligaments and joint capsules) are negligible. Given relatively small coactivation between the major hindlimb an- tagonists in level and slope walking (Carlson-Kuhta et al. 1998; Smith et al. 1998b), ﬂexor and extensor joint moments can be used to characterize loading of the ﬂexor and extensor muscles. Joint moments for the hip, knee, and ankle were calculated using Newtonian equations of motion and the methods of inverse dynamics. Conventions used for the hip, knee, and ankle joints were those reported by Fowler et al. (1993). The hindlimb was modeled as a ﬁve-segment (pelvis, thigh, shank, tarsals, and digits) planar, rigid body system. Segment mass, center of mass location, and the moment of inertia for each segment were calculated using regression equations derived by Hoy and Zernicke (1985). Extensor moments were as- 1398 R. J. GREGOR, D. W. SMITH, AND B. I. PRILUTSKY J Neurophysiol • VOL 95 • MARCH 2006 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. signed positive values at each joint and their positive and negative peaks in the stance phase were measured. EMG MAGNITUDE. Peak and mean EMG (burst integral/burst dura- tion) were calculated and averaged across four to ﬁve step cycles in a total of 34 trials for all walking conditions of the three cats with implanted EMG electrodes. These 34 trials were selected from the original 96 trials that had a stance duration between 450 and 600 ms as determined from the ground reaction forces and used in the kinetic analysis. Mean and peak EMGs were studied because the mean represents the general level of recruitment in response to changes in environmental demands, whereas the peak is related to peak force during the individual step cycle. The effect of slope intensity on the mean EMG for each of the four muscles was tested for signiﬁcance by ﬁrst normalizing the mean EMG to the maximum value observed across all conditions within each cat (usually upslope walking) and then grouping the data for each muscle across cats. Peak EMG values were obtained from band-pass–ﬁltered full-wave rectiﬁed signals and also compared for each muscle between all conditions across all cats. Additionally, timing of the EMG bursts was analyzed for the steps in which the ground reaction forces were recorded in the three implanted cats (34 trials in total). The following timing parameters of the EMG burst were measured (see Fig. 1): EMG time onset with respect to PC [precontact activation time (Ti)], EMG burst duration [time of onset before PC to offset during stance (Tb)], and the muscle burst cycle [time between EMG onset and the onset of the next subsequent burst (Tc)]. These EMG timing parameters and the pa- rameters of burst magnitude were used to investigate the effects of slope in a statistical analysis. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS. To investigate the effects of slope condi- tions on characteristics of MTU length changes, ground reaction forces, joint moments, and EMG magnitude and timing in selected muscles, several t-tests were performed. Each of the above variables was tested for differences between level, upslope, and downslope conditions. The values of the variables obtained in every step cycle of each hindlimb and cat were used together in this analysis. In the preceding statistical tests the signiﬁcance level was set at 0.05. RESULTS Step cycle kinematics Although a relatively narrow range of stance durations was used, a priori, in the selection of a given trial for analysis to reduce the effects of locomotor speed, very small but signiﬁ- cant differences in the average speed of progression [deﬁned as the average speed of the iliac crest marker (I in Fig. 2) over the step cycle] were observed between slope conditions (see Table 1). The percentage of time devoted to stance (61.6 – 67.6%) and swing (32.3–38.4%), however, remained within the deﬁnition provided by Hildebrand (1976) of slow to moderate walking for all three conditions (see Table 1). Following conventions established by Carlson-Kuhta et al. (1998) and Smith et al. (1998b) (Fig. 2, see their Fig. 3), three measures were used to describe hindlimb orientation at paw contact (PC) and paw liftoff (PO) for the three slope condi- tions. Hip height (Hh) during stance, anterior placement of the paw at contact (Da), and posterior placement of the paw at FIG. 1. Raw electromyogram (EMG) patterns for the so- leus (SO), lateral gastrocnemius (LG), medial gastrocnemius (MG), and plantaris (P) during downslope, level, and up- slope overground walking. Ti, the precontact activation time, is the time between EMG onset and paw contact (PC); Tb, the burst duration, is the time from burst onset to cessation; and Tc, the muscle burst cycle, is the time from burst onset to subsequent burst onset. These data are exemplar data for one cat. FIG. 2. Position of the hindlimb at PC, 50% stance, and paw off (PO) during downslope, level, and upslope overground walking. Letters I, H, K, A, and M denote marker positions on the iliac crest and the hip, knee, ankle, and metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints, respectively. Hh is the line denoting the shortest distance from the hip to the walkway; Da and Dp correspond to the distance between Hh line and the digit marker at PC and PO, respec- tively, parallel to the walkway surface; the result- ant ground reaction force vector (the arrow at 50% stance) is positioned with respect to the hindlimb at midstance. Data are exemplar data for one cat. 1399MECHANICS OF SLOPE WALKING J Neurophysiol • VOL 95 • MARCH 2006 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. liftoff (Dp) were measured for all step cycles used in the kinetic analyses. In general, Da decreased signiﬁcantly and Dp increased signiﬁcantly ( P /H110210.05) as slope intensity progressed from downslope to level to upslope walking (Table 1). Changes in hip height were very small across the three condi- tions, although the differences were signiﬁcant ( P /H110210.05; Table 1). Angles for the hip, knee, ankle, and metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints were calculated, time normalized, and averaged with