Control of reﬂex reversal in stick insect walking: effects of intersegmental signals, changes in direction, and optomotor-induced turning Katja Hellekes, Eric Blincow, Julia Hoffmann, and Ansgar Büschges Department of Animal Physiology, Zoological Institute, Biocenter Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany Submitted 1 August 2011; accepted in ﬁnal form 6 October 2011 Hellekes K, Blincow E, Hoffmann J, Büschges A. Control of reﬂex reversal in stick insect walking: effects of intersegmental signals, changes in direction, and optomotor-induced turning. J Neu- rophysiol 107: 239 –249, 2012. First published October 12, 2011; doi:10.1152/jn.00718.2011.—In many animals, the effects of sensory feedback on motor output change during locomotion. These changes can occur as reﬂex reversals in which sense organs that activate muscles to counter perturbations in posture control instead reinforce movements in walking. The mechanisms underlying these changes are only partially understood. As such, it is unclear whether reﬂex reversals are modulated when locomotion is adapted, such as during changes in walking direction or in turning movements. We investi- gated these questions in the stick insect Carausius morosus , where sensory signals from the femoral chordotonal organ are known to produce resistance reﬂexes at rest but assistive movements during walking. We studied how intersegmental signals from neighboring legs affect the generation of reﬂex reversals in a semi-intact prepara- tion that allows free leg movement during walking. We found that reﬂex reversal was enhanced by stepping activity of the ipsilateral neighboring rostral leg, whereas stepping of contralateral legs had no effect. Furthermore, we found that the occurrence of reﬂex reversals was task-speciﬁc: in the front legs of animals with ﬁve legs walking, reﬂex reversal was generated only during forward and not backward walking. Similarly, during optomotor-induced curved walking, reﬂex reversal occurred only in the middle leg on the inside of the turn and not in the contralateral leg on the outside of the turn. Thus our results show for the ﬁrst time that the nervous system modulates reﬂexes in individual legs in the adaptation of walking to speciﬁc tasks. motor control; behavioral task; locomotion; proprioception FEEDBACK FROM LEG SENSORY organs that signal position, move- ment, and force plays an essential role in the generation and adaptation of locomotion (summaries in Bässler 1983; Büsch- ges 2005; Grillner 1981; Orlovsky et al. 1999; Pearson 2008). In many systems, the effects of sensory inputs during walking differ from those seen in postural control, and these changes can occur as reﬂex reversals (Duysens et al. 2000). For exam- ple, the Golgi tendon organs of vertebrates elicit reﬂexes in posture that act to decrease muscle tension and the resultant forces (Prochazka 1996). During walking, these receptors in- stead amplify muscle tension in the stance phase (Pearson and Collins 1993). Similar reﬂex reversals are found in other receptors of both invertebrates (crayﬁsh: DiCaprio and Clarac 1981; Sillar and Skorupski 1986; insects: locust, Theophilidis and Burns 1990; Zill 1985; stick insect, Bässler 1976, 1986, 1988) and vertebrates (cat, Forssberg et al. 1975; rat, Fouad and Pearson 1997; human, Duysens et al. 1990). The occur- rence of reﬂex reversals can depend on the phase activity in rhythmic movements (e.g., Fouad and Pearson 1997; Pearson and Collins 1993; Skorupski and Sillar 1986) or, more gener- ally, on the behavioral state of the animal (e.g., Bässler 1988; Zill 1985; for review, see, e.g., Büschges and El Manira 1998; Clarac et al. 2000; Pearson 1993). In most systems, the speciﬁc mechanisms underlying the generation and modulation of reﬂex reversals have not been determined. It is also unclear how reﬂex reversals are inte- grated with other processes controlling and directing walking. For example, it is not known whether regulation of reﬂex reversals occurs as part of the processes mediating interleg coordination in walking. In addition, walking patterns can be extensively adapted in changing the direction of progression and during visually guided stepping (Pang and Yang 2002). It has not been determined how such changes affect the occur- rence of reﬂex reversals, although their regulation must be part of the adaptation of walking patterns (Pang and Yang 2002; Pearson 1993). We have studied this problem by utilizing the reﬂex effects of the stick insect femoral chordotonal organ (fCO). Signals from the fCO produce resistance reﬂexes (RR) in quiescent animals at rest that could function in postural load compensa- tion (Bässler 1974; for summary, see Bässler 1993). These reﬂexes have been shown to change when the animal generates active leg movements (Bässler 1976, 1988). Afferents of the chordotonal organ that signal joint ﬂexion then inhibit extensor ﬁring and assist the generation of ﬂexor activity. These changes represent a reﬂex reversal and occur as the ﬁrst part of a sequence of muscle activities termed the “active reaction” (AR; Bässler 1988). Several studies have examined the under- lying neural elements within the local premotor network that mediate both the resistance and assistance reﬂexes of the fCO in a distributed fashion (e.g., Bässler 1988; Bässler and Büsch- ges 1990; Driesang and Büschges 1996; for review, see Bässler and Büschges 1998). However, no information is currently available on how the reﬂex reversal is initiated and regulated in vivo in a walking animal. Thus, at present, it is not known which upstream neuronal processes of the femur-tibia (FTi) control network underlie the behavioral state-dependent alterations in the pro- cessing of fCO signals (see Büschges and El Manira 1998). Several studies have demonstrated effects of descending inputs on local reﬂexes in insects (Knop et al. 2001; Mu and Ritz- mann 2008a; Ridgel et al. 2007), but these experiments were not performed in animals that were walking. To address this issue, we have 1) studied the role of intersegmental signals for the local generation of reﬂex reversal, and 2) tested whether the generation of the local reﬂex reversal depends on the speciﬁc motor behavior of the animal. To study the effects of leg Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: K. Hellekes, Zoo- logical Institute, Biocenter Cologne, Univ. of Cologne, Zülpicher Straße 47 b, 50674 Cologne, Germany (e-mail: katja.hellekes@uni-koeln.de). J Neurophysiol 107: 239 –249, 2012. First published October 12, 2011; doi:10.1152/jn.00718.2011. 2390022-3077/12 Copyright © 2012 the American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. coordination, we investigated the inﬂuence of leg stepping in ipsi- and contralateral neighboring legs on the generation of the reﬂex reversal in the middle leg, using a semi-intact prepara- tion in which the remaining legs were walking on a slippery surface (Graham 1981; Gruhn et al. 2006). To examine the behavioral speciﬁcity of reﬂex reversal, we elicited reﬂexes by chordotonal organ stimulation during forward and backward walking and in optomotor-induced turning during stepping sequences. MATERIALS AND METHODS Experiments were performed on adult female stick insects ( Carau- sius morosus Br.) at room temperature (20 –22°C) under reduced light conditions. Animals were obtained from a breeding colony maintained at the University of Cologne. The experimental procedures reported in the study comply with the German National and State Regulations for Animal Welfare and Animal Experiments. Positioning of the experimental animal for walking. The experi- mental animals were positioned above a slippery surface at a distance of about 8 –12 mm so that the resting angle of the FTi-joint in the middle and hindlegs was /H1101190° (Fig. 1; Epstein and Graham 1983; Graham 1981; Gruhn et al. 2006). The stick insect was ﬁxed dorsal side up to a foam-covered metal rod by means of dental cement (Protemp II; 3M ESPE, St. Paul, MN) placed on the pro-, meso-, and metathorax (Fig. 1). The investigated leg was glued to an extension of the rod. The coxa and femur of that leg were immobilized, but the tibia hung over the edge of the rod extension with a FTi-joint angle of 110°. Preparation for fCO stimulation and recording of motor activity. A small window was cut dorsally into the femoral cuticle, allowing for mechanical stimulation of the fCO and for extracellular recordings from tibial muscles and motor nerves (Fig. 1; Büschges 1989). The leg cavity was ﬁlled with saline (Weidler and Diecke 1969), and the apodeme of the fCO was attached to a moveable clamp controlled by a linear motor. Mechanical displacements of the apodeme were produced by applying voltages to the motor by means of a stimulus generator (electronics workshop; Zoological Institute, Cologne, Ger- many). The fCO was stimulated with ramp-and-hold stimuli that produce displacements of 300 and 400 /H9262m from the starting position. These displacements induce FTi-joint angles between 110 and 50 or 30°, respectively (Weiland et al. 1986). The activity of the extensor tibiae motoneurons was recorded extracellularly from the extensor nerve F2 via hook electrode (modiﬁed after Schmitz et al. 1988). In the majority of experiments, the activity of the ﬂexor tibiae muscles was monitored via an electromyogram (EMG; Fig. 1; e.g., Rosenbaum et al. 2010). Walking activities were monitored by myographic re- cordings of the ﬂexor tibiae (front legs) and/or the retractor coxae muscles of the middle leg, depending on the experiment. Based on the particular experiment, either the front or middle leg was stimulated and recorded from in the manner described above. Other legs were either amputated or allowed to freely walk, depending on the speciﬁc experimental condition (see below). Experiments with stepping neighboring legs. The middle leg was ﬁxed perpendicular to the body axis, and the ipsilateral hindleg was removed (modiﬁcations of leg numbers between the different exper- imental conditions are not shown in Fig. 1). Three different experi- mental conditions were used to investigate the inﬂuence of interseg- mental signals on the middle leg: 1) the ipsilateral front leg and all three contralateral legs were present and stepping; 2) only the con- tralateral legs were present and stepping; and 3) only the ipsilateral front leg was present and stepping. Experiments on forward and backward walking. For the experi- ments on forward and backward walking, the left front leg was ﬁxed at a position of 45° anteriorly. All other legs were free to move. Experiments on curve walking. The left middle leg was immobi- lized while all other legs were free to move (Fig. 1). Walking movements were induced by tactile stimulation of the animal’s abdo- men or head with a small paintbrush (Fig. 1), depending on desired walking direction (Graham and Epstein 1985). Once stepping was initiated, tactile stimulation ceased. An animal was considered to be walking forward or backward when the unrestrained legs exhibited a clear forward or backward stepping pattern. Curve walking was induced by optomotor stimulation. To accomplish this, we placed two screens laterally in front of the stick insect and projected a vertical black and white stripe pattern by means of an optomotor projector (Scharstein 1989). To elicit curve walking in the stick insects, the stripes on both screens moved to either the right or left, which elicited the respective walking direction (Fig. 1; Gruhn et al. 2011). Physiological signals were ampliﬁed and ﬁltered (e.g., von Ucker- mann and Büschges 2009) and recorded using a Micro 1401 A/D converter (sampling rate, 12.5 kHz) and Spike2 data acquisition/ analysis software (version 5.04; Cambridge Electronic Design). Statistical analysis was done with the modiﬁed Student’s t-test (Dixon and Massey 1996). Data were considered to differ signiﬁcantly at P /H110210.01. To determine the reliability of the frequency of occur- rence of AR, we deﬁned the 95% conﬁdence intervals for the different experimental situations (Hayes 1988). If the conﬁdence intervals of the mean values do not overlap, the inﬂuences are statistically signif- icant. We performed an additional control to test whether the activity of tibial motoneurons during fCO stimulation in the front leg during forward and backward walking differs relative to the activity without fCO stimulation. Therefore, we recorded responses to fCO stimulation and compared them with sequences in which the voltages were generated and recorded but the fCO was not ﬁxed into the stimulator clamp and hence not displaced. We then determined the chance level for a motoneuronal pattern similar to the AR. Evaluation of the data and plotting of the graphs were performed with OriginPro 8.5 and CorelDRAW X4. In the text and ﬁgures, “ N” gives the number of animals, and “ n” gives the sample size. RESULTS Processing of fCO signals depends on the ipsilateral step- ping front leg. In the ﬁrst set of experiments, we investigated whether the generation of the reﬂex reversal in the FTi-joint in a given segment depended on locomotor activity in neighbor- ing legs. To do so, we stimulated the fCO of the middle leg while recording tibial extensor nerve and in some experiments also ﬂexor muscle activity in preparations that differed in the number of neighboring legs stepping. Speciﬁcally, we used three experimental conditions. Fig. 1. Preparation for studying reﬂex reversals in stick insect walking. The stick insect is mounted on a wooden rod above a slippery surface. Mechanical stimuli that mimic femorotibial (FTi)-joint ﬂexion are applied to the femoral chordotonal organ (fCO) of the middle leg. Reﬂex effects are monitored in recordings of the nerve to the tibial extensor (tib ext F2) and in myograms of the tibial ﬂexor muscle. In some experiments, recordings were taken from the muscles of the prothoracic leg (see text for description). Turning movements were induced by optomotor stimuli. EMG, electromyogram. 240 TASK-SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF SENSORY SIGNALS J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00718.2011 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. In the ﬁrst condition, the ipsilateral front leg as well as all contralateral legs were free to move (Fig. 2 A). The fCO of the left middle leg was stimulated with ramp-and-hold stimuli while the activity of tibial extensor motoneurons was recorded from nerve F2. On tactile stimulation of the abdomen with a paintbrush, the experimental animals started forward stepping movements with their free legs (gray shaded area in Fig. 2 B). At rest, fCO elongation induced the typical RR activation in tibial motoneurons (Fig. 2 B, 1st fCO stimulus and inset) with slow (SETi) and fast (FETi) extensor tibiae motoneurons being activated on elongation of the fCO (for details, see Bässler 1993). However, during stepping sequences, a reﬂex reversal was seen to occur, and fCO elongation produced inhibition of ﬁring of tibial extensor motoneurons and activation of ﬂexor motoneurons (Fig. 2 B, e.g., 4th stimulus and inset). Extensor activity resumed toward the end of the elongation phase of the stimulus. This motor activity on elongation signals from the fCO is characteristic of the AR (Bässler 1976, 1988). No systematic modiﬁcation was detected on fCO relaxation [for a detailed analysis of the time course in motoneuron activity during the AR, see Bässler (1986, 1988) and Nothof and Bässler (1990)]. Figure 2 C shows the same situation together with electromyographic recordings of motor activity of the stepping neighboring legs. The muscles monitored are active in the stance phase, i.e., the ﬂexor tibiae for the two front legs and the retractor coxae in the contralateral middle leg. The differ- ence in the inﬂuence of fCO elongation on tibial motoneuron activity between the resting animal and the animal stepping with the other legs is apparent in average peristimulus time (PST) histograms of the extensor activity (Fig. 2, D and E) for both situations. During fCO elongation in the inactive animal, extensor activity increases drastically as FETi and SETi are activated, and during the hold phase of the stimuli, only SETi shows a higher frequency (Fig. 2 D). In the stepping animal, fCO elongation leads to a cessation in extensor activity. Ex- tensor activity resumes toward the end of fCO elongation, which is known as part II of the AR (for details, see Bässler 1986, 1988; Fig. 2 E). The results were the same in all six animals tested with the probability of occurrence of the reﬂex reversal in the middle leg being on average 61.5% ( N /H110056, n /H11005 397; see summary in Fig. 4 A) and reaching up to 94% for individual animals. Thus we have observed that stepping in neighboring legs promotes the occurrence of reﬂex reversal. Interestingly, virtually the same results were gathered from the second condition in which only the left ipsilateral front leg was left intact and free to step, whereas all other legs except the Fig. 2. Reﬂex reversals in the middle leg. A: stick ﬁgure of the experimental setup. The ipsilateral hindleg was removed in all experiments to prevent contact with the apparatus. B: resistance reﬂex (RR) in a resting animal and reﬂex reversal during walk- ing. In this sequence, 1st the animal was standing, and displacement of the apodeme of the chordotonal organ (fCO stim) mimicking joint ﬂexion induces RR activation ﬁring in tibial extensor motoneurons (tib ext F2). Walking was then elicited by tactile stimulation producing bouts of activity in ﬂexor muscles and extensor motoneurons of the middle leg (gray shaded area). Elongation stimuli of the meso- thoracic fCO no longer generate a RR but can induce a reﬂex reversal [active reaction (AR)], i.e., inhibiting activity of extensor motoneurons and ac- tivating the ﬂexor muscle (reﬂex reversal) during fCO elongation. The 2 insets give enlarged presen- tations of the motor activity during the RR and the AR (see text for details). C: original recording from a similar experiment with additional presentation of electromyographic recordings of ﬂexor motor activ- ity in the front leg muscles and retractor coxae muscles in the contralateral middle legs to monitor the stepping situation of neighboring legs. D and E: peristimulus time (PST) histograms (1 animal) of extensor ﬁring frequency during RR ( D) and reﬂex reversals (E) in walking (data from 1 animal). FlxTi, ﬂexor tibiae muscle; RetCx, retractor coxae motor nerve; fCO stim, mechanical displacement of the apodeme of fCO signaling FTi-joint ﬂexion (up on traces); pro, prothoracic (front leg); meso, mesotho- racic (middle leg); c, contralateral; i, ipsilateral; avg., average; n, number of stimulations; *tactile stimulation; p, prothorax; m, meso-, metathorax. 241TASK-SPECIFIC PROCESSING OF SENSORY SIGNALS J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00718.2011 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. stimulated left middle leg were removed ( N /H110055; Fig. 3 A). During stepping sequences of the ipsilateral front leg, fCO signals indicating joint ﬂexion promoted the generation of reﬂex reversal in tibial motoneurons (Fig. 3 A). During front leg stepping, the probability for generating the AR reached 93% for individual animals, being on average 57.6% for the ﬁve animals tested ( n /H11005116; Fig. 4 B). The difference between the inﬂuence of fCO elongation on tibial extensor motoneuron activity is also evident in PST histograms of the average extensor motoneuron activity for the resting (Fig. 3 C, top) and the stepping animal (Fig. 3 C, bottom: only stepping stimuli with AR, inset: all stepping stimuli). Therefore, stepping in the ipsilateral front leg is sufﬁcient to produce an increased fre- quency of reﬂex reversal in