Distribution of Heterogenic Reﬂexes Among the Quadriceps and Triceps Surae Muscles of the Cat Hind Limb Ronnie J. H. Wilmink and T. Richard Nichols Department of Physiology, Whitehead Biomedical Research Building, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322 Submitted 19 September 2002; accepted in ﬁnal form 18 June 2003 Wilmink, Ronnie J. H. and T. Richard Nichols. Distribution of heterogenic reﬂexes among the quadriceps and triceps surae muscles of the cat hind limb. J Neurophysiol 90: 2310 –2324, 2003. First published June 25, 2003; 10.1152/jn.00833.2002. Neural signals from proprioceptors in muscles provide length and force-related linkages among muscles of the limbs. The functions of this network of heter- ogenic reﬂexes remain unclear. New data are reported here on the distribution and magnitudes of neural feedback among quadriceps and triceps surae muscles in the decerebrate cat. The purpose of this paper was to distinguish whether inhibitory-force feedback is directed against muscles by virtue of the motor-unit composition or articula- tion of the muscle. These studies were carried out using controlled stretches and measurements of the resulting force responses of indi- vidual quadriceps and triceps surae muscles. Responses were evoked over a wide range of background force levels. In agreement with earlier electrophysiological studies, excitatory length feedback strongly linked the vastus muscles, but excitatory reﬂexes between each vastus and rectus femoris muscles were weak. We also observed a substantial excitatory linkage from the vastus muscles to the soleus muscle. In contrast, force-related inhibition was absent in the heter- ogenic reﬂexes among the vastus muscles but strong and bidirectional between each vastus muscle and the rectus femoris muscle and be- tween triceps surae and quadriceps muscles. We conclude that short- latency feedback in the hindlimb is organized according to muscle articulation. Length feedback within muscle groups regulates joint stiffness while interjoint length feedback may compensate for the effects of nonuniform inertial properties of the limb. Force feedback is organized to regulate coupling between joints and, along with length feedback, determine the mechanical properties of the endpoint. INTRODUCTION Neural feedback from receptors in skeletal muscle projects back to the muscle of origin as well as to other muscles in both humans and cats (Brooke and McIlroy 1985; Eccles et al. 1957; Edgley et al. 1986; Koceja 1995; Meunier et al. 1990; Mi- siaszek and Pearson 1997; Roby-Brami and Bussel 1990). Knowledge of the intermuscular distribution of this feedback is essential to an understanding of the functions of proprioceptive pathways in motor coordination. Recent work (Nichols 1989) based on mechanographic analysis in decerebrate animals (Lid- dell and Sherrington 1924) has shown the existence of two classes of rapid feedback. Heterogenic length feedback acts with approximately the same time course as the stretch reﬂex and leads to excitation of muscles with synergistic actions and inhibition of antagonistic muscles (Nichols 1999; Nichols and Kofﬂer-Smulevitz 1991). The magnitudes of these reﬂexes are essentially independent of background force and, in the triceps surae and pretibial ﬂexor muscles of the cat, correspond to the distribution of group Ia afferents from muscles spindles (Eccles et al. 1957; Scott and Mendell 1976). Because the distribution of group Ia effects appears as a dominant factor in the distri- bution of this feedback, these pathways are likely to regulate joint stiffness in a directional manner as predicted by an extension of the myotatic unit concept (Nichols et al. 1999). The other class of heterogenic feedback is inhibitory and increases with active background force in the muscle of origin (Bonasera and Nichols 1994; Nichols et al. 1999). This feed- back is widely distributed among antigravity muscles in the hindlimb and appears to arise at least in part from Golgi tendon organs. The principles that govern the distribution of this feedback remain unclear. It has been argued that excitatory force feedback, which is apparently expressed during locomo- tion (Pearson 1995; Pearson and Collins 1993; Prochazka 1996), is widely distributed among extensor muscles to provide a loading reﬂex (Dietz and Duysens 2000). Widespread group I excitation has also been observed in the ﬁctive locomotion preparation (Angel et al. 1996; Guertin et al. 1995), although group I excitation may be weak from the quadriceps to the triceps surae muscles. Force-related inhibition, however, is not uniformly distributed across antigravity muscles. Among the triceps surae muscles, inhibitory feedback extends from either gastrocnemius lateralis or medialis (LG or MG) muscles to soleus (SOL) but not between LG and MG (Nichols 1994, 1999). These data suggest that either motor-unit type or artic- ulation govern the distribution of this feedback. Inhibitory- force feedback has also been observed to link the triceps surae muscles with the muscles of ankle stabilization (Nichols 1994), suggesting that the distribution of inhibitory-force feedback links muscles that cross different axes of rotation. Single motor-unit studies have shown that type I motor units in MG are not inhibited by the stretch of MG (Dacko et al. 1996), supporting by exclusion the hypothesis that inhibitory-force feedback links muscles that cross different joints or axes of rotation. The systems of quadriceps and triceps surae muscles provide a means of further validating our proposed rules governing the distribution of the preceding classes of heterogenic feedback. The quadriceps muscles consist of single joint vastus [vastus Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: T. R. Nichols, Dept. of Physiology, Whitehead Biomedical Research Building, Emory University, 615 Michael St., Atlanta, GA 30322 (E-mail: trn@physio.emory.edu). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 90: 2310 –2324, 2003. First published June 25, 2003; 10.1152/jn.00833.2002. 2310 0022-3077/03 $5.00 Copyright © 2003 The American Physiological Society www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn at Portland State Univ (131.252.218.122) on October 5, 2022. lateralis (VL), vastus medialis (VM), vastus intermedius (VI)] and two joint rectus femoris (RF) muscles. The activation patterns of RF are more divergent from those of vastus (V) than are the patterns of MG and LG from those of SOL (Engberg and Lundberg 1969). It can be predicted from this behavioral data that length feedback between RF and the vastus muscles is weaker than length feedback among the vastus muscles. This prediction is supported by studies of the distribution of mono- synaptic Ia feedback in anesthetized preparations (Eccles et al. 1957), but this distribution of feedback has not been described in the unanesthetized state as has the reﬂex organization for the triceps surae muscles. Under the proposed rules, feedback between quadriceps and triceps surae muscles should be pre- dominantly inhibitory and force related. Electrophysiological evidence showed that the only excitatory linkage between the two muscle groups is monosynaptic excitation from the vastus intermedius to the soleus muscle (Eccles et al. 1957). The quadriceps muscles also provide a means of testing the hypothesis that inhibitory-force feedback is distributed accord- ing to articulation because articulation and motor-unit type can be dissociated in this muscle group. The vastus muscles con- tain both homogeneous and heterogeneous ﬁber types (Ariano et al. 1973). In particular, VI is composed essentially entirely of type I muscle ﬁbers, whereas VM and VL are heteroge- neous. Our hypothesis predicts that short-latency force feed- back should link RF with each vastus muscle but not link muscles within the vastus group. In this paper, we describe the relative distributions of exci- tatory, presumably length feedback and inhibitory-force feed- back among the quadriceps and triceps surae muscles. We found the distributions of the two kinds of feedback to be complementary and in line with our predictions. Force feed- back linked single-joint with two-joint muscles in the quadri- ceps group, but these links were bidirectional unlike the uni- directional links in the triceps surae muscles (Nichols 1999). In addition, we provide evidence that the excitatory pathway between the vastus and soleus muscles is substantial and is likely to inﬂuence interjoint coordination as well. These results extend our previous results and support our conclusion that short-latency, inhibitory-force feedback links muscles that cross different joints and axes of rotation. In some cases, longer-latency inhibition from VI to VL was also observed, suggesting a network of inhibitory mechanisms that is orga- nized differently from the short-latency inhibition. This work has appeared in a doctoral thesis (Wilmink 1998), and prelim- inary data supporting these conclusions have been published elsewhere (Nichols 1994; Wilmink et al. 1996, 1997). METHODS The results depicted in this study were drawn from experiments on 12 healthy adult cats of either sex (6 females and 6 males) weighing 3.25–6 kg. In most cases, the studies were conducted on both legs so each muscle was represented twice per preparation. Surgery Under deep anesthesia using iso ﬂurane gas, an intercollicular de- cerebration was performed, removing all brain matter rostral to the transection. On both hind legs, the muscles of the quadriceps and triceps surae were separated, and their tendons were connected to individual clamps ﬁxed to strain gauge myographs for the force measurements. Each myograph was mounted by way of a miniature universal joint to a linear slide. The universal joints maintained alignment between each muscle tendon and the moving slide. Muscle lengths were controlled using servo motors that moved the linear slides by way of ﬂexible stainless steel cables clamped to the motor pulleys. The tendency of the cables to unwind and pull back amounted to /H110211 N and was compensated by unloading the slides with elastic bands. Position feedback was obtained from precision potentiometers mounted in line with the motor shafts. Up to four such actuators were available for these experiments. The quadriceps muscles, VL, VM, VI, and RF, were separated in each leg in some preparations. During most surgeries, it was possible to separate these muscles with little injury, but in some preparations, it was necessary to sacri ﬁce certain muscles to avoid damaging the adjacent muscle. For instance, VI merged in a complex way with both VL and VM in some cases. Also, the tendon of RF usually merged with VL and VM before inserting on the patella. As a result, VL was included in the study 11 times, RF and VI were included 10 times, and VM 7 times. In some experiments, the quadriceps group (Q) was subdivided into two groups based on articulation, namely, the vastus muscles (V) and RF. Similarly, the triceps surae group was divided into individual muscles, namely, MG, LG, and soleus (S) muscles or in subgroups based on articulation, namely the gastrocnemius muscles (G) and S. In each leg, the posterior tibial nerve was dissected, draped over a hook electrode, and cut distally. Fixation of the leg was accomplished using rods ending in screws, which were inserted into the femur right below the hip and one just above the knee. Hip pins were used to immobilize the pelvis. The crossed-extension reﬂex was evoked to recruit all of the mus- cles of the quadriceps and triceps surae groups. The contralateral posterior tibial nerve was stimulated using 40-Hz monophasic con- stant current pulses at two times reﬂex threshold. The initial length of each muscle was set by stretching the muscle until a passive tension of /H110111 N was achieved. Data were acquired while the muscles were quiescent as well as when they were activated by the crossed-exten- sion reﬂex. The stretches were trapezoidal in shape, with a rise- and fall time of 50 ms, amplitude of 2 mm, and a hold phase of 250 ms. Stretch velocity was therefore 40 mm/s. The amplitude of 2 mm was chosen to fall generally in the range of active lengthening during locomotion. The rise time of 50 ms was rapid enough to provide a sufﬁciently large prere ﬂex force for reliable measurement of the intrinsic mechanical response of the muscle. This measurement was useful to detect the presence of mechanical artifacts. Protocols Three protocols were used to evaluate autogenic and heterogenic reﬂexes. In protocol 1, one muscle, the donor, was stretched every 2–3 s during activation using the crossed-extension re ﬂex. Another mus- cle, the recipient, was held isometrically (Nichols 1999). Any het- erogenic re ﬂex effects were detected by increases or decreases in force in the recipient. In protocol 2, stretches of the recipient were performed in alternation with stretches of both donor and recipient as the force decayed (see Fig. 1 B). Two groups of records resulted from this protocol, namely, one with stretch of the recipient only and one with stretch of both muscles. Heterogenic reﬂex effects were detected by changes in the magnitude of the reﬂexes in the recipient muscle on even-numbered trials. Force responses in the ﬁrst group were purely autogenic, and responses in the second group consisted of autogenic and heterogenic components. These latter responses were therefore referred to as compound responses. Heterogenic effects present for protocol 2 but not protocol 1 would suggest that these effects are presynaptic. In protocol 3, two muscles were stretched independently and then together (Fig. 1 A). In this case, each muscle served as both recipient and donor, resulting in three groups of responses. This protocol was used under quiescent conditions when a large number of trials were possible. 2311HETEROGENIC REFLEXES AMONG ANTI-GRAVITY MUSCLES J Neurophysiol • VOL 90 • OCTOBER 2003 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn at Portland State Univ (131.252.218.122) on October 5, 2022. In selected cases, /H11349150 /H9262g strychnine was injected intravenously toward the end of the experiment to test whether inhibitory re ﬂexes were likely to be mediated by glycinergic pathways (Bonasera and Nichols 1994; Nichols 1999). At the end of each experiment, the animal was killed with an overdose of pentobarbital sodium (100 mg/kg iv). A 486-based personal computer sampled the length and force channels (/H113498 total) at 500 Hz. The precision of data acquisition was 0.05 N for the force channels and 0.04 mm for the length channels. The same computer provided the servo ampliﬁers (PMI-Motion Tech- nologies) with the length commands at a constant rate of 2048 Hz/channel through a dedicated 12-bit D/A conversion card. Quantiﬁcation of reﬂex effects The data were analyzed according to the acquisition protocol (see above) using custom software written in Matlab (Mathworks). QUIESCENT STATE. The quiescent runs, in which the background force was essentially constant, were acquired using protocol 3 and analyzed by superimposing the averaged autogenic with the averaged heterogenic plus autogenic (compound) force response for that muscle (Fig. 1 A). The difference in area under these force traces, in the interval from 10 ms after stretch onset until the end of the hold phase (see Fig. 1A, bottom), was computed and normalized to the area under the autogenic force response. The 10-ms start time for this integration was chosen because re ﬂex effects could not have begun before this time. For each muscle combination /H1135010–15 complete runs of data were collected. Figure 1A shows the initial portion of a quiescent run and the resulting averaged responses as an example. ACTIVATED STATE. The background force in all the activated mus- cles generally decayed during the crossed-extension re ﬂex to levels observed during the quiescent state, over a time course of 10 –60 s. Data were collected for 50 ms prior the onset of stretch using either protocol 1 or 2. The off-line analysis program calculated an estimate of the baseline force for every force response, by computing a linear ﬁt through the ﬁrst and last 50 ms of data for every trial during data collection. The “force response ” is here de ﬁned as the difference between the force at the corresponding time points and the estimated baseline force. The force responses were measured every 5 ms during the time course of the trial for the responses at all force levels. Therefore each response measurement was associated with a time point and an initial force as represented in the three-dimensional plots (see following text). For data collected using protocol 1, one group of responses of the recipient muscles resulted. For each of these time points, the relationships of the responses to background force were ﬁtted using quadratic polynomials. The polynomials were plotted together for all time points in the form of three-dimensional surfaces with time and force as independent variables (Fig. 8). Positive values on the vertical axis represent excitatory effects. For data obtained using protocol 2, two groups of responses were obtained, namely, autogenic and compound (Fig. 1B). Force responses at two particular time points, the end of the ramp (the “dynamic” response, as shown in Fig. 2, A–C) and the end of the hold-phase (the “static” response, as shown in Fig. 2 D) were used to represent early and late effects of heterogenic re ﬂexes (Nichols and Kof ﬂer-Smule- vitz 1991). For each experimental run, these points were graphed against the initial force (force averaged over 5–45 ms prior to stretch) of the donor muscle (Fig. 2) because force-related heterogenic effects are correlated mainly with force of the donor muscle (Bonasera and Nichols 1994; Nichols 1999). The points for the autogenic and com- pound responses were then ﬁtted with second order polynomials (see Fig. 2). Con ﬁdence intervals (95%) were also computed for polyno- mials corresponding to autogenic responses or for polynomials cor- responding to both autogenic and compound responses. Heterogenic effects were detected by signi ﬁcant differences between the polyno- mials corresponding to autogenic and compound responses. In some cases, the con ﬁdence intervals for a pair of polynomials were overlapping or the data points for the compound responses fell within the conﬁdence limits for the autogenic responses. In this sense, the two polynomials were considered statistically indistinguishable for the range over which they everlapped. Overlapping con ﬁdence FIG. 1. Illustration of experimental proto- cols and data analysis. A: portion of data from vastus lateralis (VL) and vastus medialis (VM) are shown using protocol 3. F (VL) and I (VM) indicate autogenic response and E (VL) and /H17040(VM) designate force responses due to autogenic plus heterogenic reﬂexes (compound responses). Bottom 2 graphs are averaged re- sponses for both muscles, with the SDs shown on each curve in dotted lines. The responses that remain unmarked are the isometric force responses of the recipient muscle that result from stretching the donor muscle. Baseline forces were subtracted. The vertical dashed lines indicate the limits for integration (10–300 ms after initiation of the ramp). B: force re- sponses of RF using protocol 2 during a crossed-extension re ﬂex. The donor muscle was VI. Bottom: the surface displays the exci- tation (positive deﬂection on z axis) as a func- tion of time and the initial force (Fo) of the donor muscle. The excitation was computed by subtracting the quadratic polynomials ﬁtted to speciﬁc time points of the autogenic responses from corresponding polynomia