Signals From Load Sensors Underlie Interjoint Coordination During Stepping Movements of the Stick Insect Leg Turgay Akay, 1 Sebastian Haehn, 1 Josef Schmitz, 2 and Ansgar Bu¨schges1 1Zoological Institute, University of Cologne, 50923 Cologne; and 2Deparment of Biological Cybernetics, University of Bielefeld, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany Submitted 30 December 2003; accepted in ﬁnal form 1 March 2004 Akay, Turgay, Sebastian Haehn, Josef Schmitz, and Ansgar Bu¨schges. Signals from load sensors underlie interjoint coordination during stepping movements of the stick insect leg. J Neurophysiol 92: 42–51, 200442. First published March 3, 2004; 10.1152/ jn.01271.2003. During stance and swing phase of a walking stick insect, the retractor coxae (RetCx) and protractor coxae (ProCx) motoneurons and muscles supplying the thorax-coxa (TC)-joint gen- erate backward and forward movements of the leg. Their activity is tightly coupled to the movement of the more distal leg segments, i.e., femur, tibia, and tarsus. We used the single middle leg preparation to study how this coupling is generated. With only the distal leg seg- ments of the middle leg being free to move, motoneuronal activity of the de-afferented and -efferented TC-joint is similarly coupled to leg stepping. RetCx motoneurons are active during stance and ProCx motoneurons during swing. We studied whether sensory signals are involved in this coordination of TC-joint motoneuronal activity. Ab- lation of the load measuring campaniform sensilla (CS) revealed that they substantially contribute to the coupling of TC-joint motoneuronal activity to leg stepping. Individually ablating trochanteral and femoral CS revealed the trochanteral CS to be necessary for establishing the coupling between leg stepping and coxal motoneuron activity. When the locomotor system was active and generated alternating bursts of activity in ProCx and RetCx motoneurons, stimulation of the CS by rearward bending of the femur in otherwise de-afferented mesotho- racic ganglion terminated ongoing ProCx motoneuronal activity and initiated RetCx motoneuronal activity. We show that cuticular strain signals from the trochanteral CS play a major role in shaping TC-joint motoneuronal activity during walking and contribute to their coordi- nation with the stepping pattern of the distal leg joints. We present a model for the sensory control of timing of motoneuronal activity in walking movements of the single middle leg. INTRODUCTION In adaptive locomotion of legged animals, it is important that sense organs of the limbs continuously provide the CNS with information about actual position and movement of the joints as well as about the load on the limb. The functional walking pattern is generated by the interaction of these sensory signals with central pattern generating networks, coordinating pathways transmitting information between limbs, and de- scending signals from higher brain centers (Orlovsky et al. 1999; Pearson 1993; Prochazka 1996). It is well known that load or force information is an impor- tant sensory parameter used in the generation of a functional walking motor pattern. This information serves in feedback loops in the control of the muscle forces during the stance phase and is used for adapting the motor output to the actual requirements of force production (e.g., cockroach: Pearson 1972; stick insect: Graham 1985; cat: Duysens and Pearson 1980; Orlovsky and Feldman 1972). Previous investigations have analyzed how changes in load during walking can affect the walking motor pattern (review: Duysens et al. 2000). In insects, the main load receptors are the campaniform sensilla (CS), sense organs that are activated by strains in the cuticle. These can result either from load on the leg or from self- generated forces of the muscles acting on the cuticle (Delco- myn 1991; Hofmann and Ba ¨ssler 1982, 1986; Pringle 1938; Wendler 1964). There is a large amount of information on how CS respond to load or force changes in the leg. The response of CS depends on the direction and magnitude of a given load or force stimulus on the cuticle (Delcomyn 1991; Ridgel et al. 2000, 2001; Zill et al. 1999). Noah et al. (2001) showed for the cockroach that during walking, activity of tibial CS is induced at the onset of the stance and declines while the body weight, carried by the leg, decreases in the course of the stance. In the stick insect walking system, information from CS ﬁelds on the trochanterofemur section has been shown to have substantial inﬂuence on the motor output of the leg (Ba¨ssler 1977; Schmitz 1993). For the stick insect species studied so far, there are four ﬁelds of CS, one of which is located on the proximal femur and three are located on the trochanter (Hofmann and Ba¨ssler 1986; Schmitz et al. 1991). Akay and coauthors (2001) have shown that the signals from the group of CS located on the proximal femur, the femoral CS (fCS), can reinforce ﬂexor tibiae mo- toneuronal activity during stance phase. The inﬂuence of the fCS signals onto the FTi-joint motoneurons appears to be transmitted both via reﬂex-pathways modulating the strength of the motor output and by pathways inﬂuencing the timing of the pattern generating networks governing the FTi-joint. The three groups of CS located on the trochanter, the trochanteral CS (trCS), do not appear to contribute to this inﬂuence. How- ever, there are reports that signals from the trCS inﬂuence motoneuronal activity of the thoraco-coxal (TC)-joint without contribution from the fCS (Akay et al. 2001; Schmitz 1993). This leads to the hypothesis that the four groups of CS are functionally segregated in their actions (Akay et al. 2001); this hypothesis signiﬁcantly differs from the previously implied consideration that trCS and fCS serve as one sensory system for controlling the leg motor output in general (Ba ¨ssler 1977; Hofmann and Ba¨ssler 1982). In the present investigation, we have set out to test in detail the inﬂuence that signals from the trCS have in sculpturing the Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: A. Bu¨schges, Dept. Animal Physiol./Zool. Institute, University of Cologne, Weyertal 119, 50923 Ko¨ln, Germany (E-mail: ansgar.bueschges@uni-koeln.de). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 92: 42–51, 2004. First published March 3, 2004; 10.1152/jn.01271.2003. 42 0022-3077/04 $5.00 Copyright © 2004 The American Physiological Society www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. motor output of the most proximal leg joint, the TC-joint of walking insects. During the stance and swing phase of a leg in freely walking stick insects, back and forth movement of the leg is controlled by the retractor coxae (RetCx) and protractor coxae (ProCx) motoneurons and muscles of the most proximal TC-joint. Previous investigations have shown that the ProCx is innervated at least by eight excitatory motoneurons and the RetCx by seven excitatory motoneurons (e.g., Graham and Wendler 1981). For the generation of useful trajectories, the activities of the antagonistic TC-joint motoneuron groups have to be tightly coupled to the movement of the more distal leg segments, i.e., the femur, the tibia, and the tarsus. A similar coupling of TC-joint motoneuronal activity was reported in the single-middle-leg preparation of the stick in- sect, in which one middle leg generates walking-like move- ments on a treadband; however, with only the CTr- and FTi- joint free to move (Fischer et al. 2001). In this single-middle- leg preparation, in which the TC-joint is ﬁxed, de-efferented, and -afferented the activity of the TC-joint motoneurons is still coupled to walking movements performed by the more distal leg joints. The activity switches from protractor to RetCx motoneuronal activity at the start of the stance phase and switches back from retractor to ProCx motoneurons at the end of the stance and the onset of swing phase. It is yet unknown which inﬂuence is underlying this phenomenon. It is possible to test the effects of selective ablation of CS groups on walking in the single-middle-leg preparation as these animals show movements with clearly distinguishable stance and swing phases. Changes in the activity of TC-joint mo- toneurons after CS ablation can be determined without having any background effects due to intrajoint in ﬂuences from the TC-joint sense organs. By sequential ablation of the trCS and fCS in walking preparations and with exclusive stimulation of trCS in reduced preparations, we show that indeed the actions of the four groups of CS are functionally segregated and that sensory signals from the trCS affect the timing of the activity in motoneuron pools supplying the TC-joint. In summary, signals from the trCS control the motor activity in the proximal TC-joint and signals from the fCS in ﬂuence control of mo- toneuronal activity of the distal FTi-joint. METHODS The experiments were performed on adult female stick insects (Cuniculina impigra) from our breeding colony at the University of Cologne and were carried out under daylight conditions and at room temperature (20-22°C). Preparation All legs except for the left middle leg were cut at the level of mid-coxa. The animals were ﬁxed with a dental cement (Protemp II, ESPE) dorsal side up along the edge of a foam platform with only the left middle leg left attached to the body. The TC-joint was ﬁxed with dental cement perpendicular to the body axis so that the leg was extending over the rim of the platform. Care was taken to leave the coxa-trochanter (CTr)-joint free to move and not to cover the cuticular strain measuring sense organs, the CS located on the trochanter (trCS) and on the proximal femur (fCS), close to the trochanter (Delcomyn 1991; Hofmann and Ba¨ssler 1986). A window was cut into the tergum at the level of the mesothoracic legs. The gut, connective tissues, and fat were removed to expose the ventral nerve cord. The thoracic cavity was ﬁlled with stick insect saline (Weidler and Diecke 1969). The lateral nerves nl2 and nl5, carrying the motor axons innervating the ProCx and the RetCx muscles, which move the TC-joint forward and backward, were crushed distally near their respective muscles. Extra- cellular recordings were made with hook electrodes (Schmitz et al. 1991) proximal to the crush point of nerves nl2 and nl5 to monitor the activity of the ProCx and RetCx motoneuron pools. In some experiments, intracellular recordings were performed of the neuropilar processes of ProCx or RetCx motoneurons. To do so, the ganglion was prepared according to established procedures (Bu¨schges 1989). In brief, the ganglion was ﬁxed on a wax-coated ganglion holder by use of ﬁne cactus needles of Nopalea dejecta. The ganglionic sheath was treated with pronase (Merck KG, Darmstadt) for 60 s to allow electrode penetration. Intracellular recordings were performed with thin-walled sharp microelectrodes in the bridge mode of an intracellular DC-ampli ﬁer (SEC-10L, NPI, Tamm, Germany). The electrodes had resistances between 15 and 25 M /H9024when ﬁlled with 3 M KAc/0.05 M KCl. The motoneurons were identi ﬁed by a one-to-one correlation of their intracellular recorded action potentials with spikes in the extracellular recordings from the lateral nerves nl2 and nl5, respectively. Under the preceding conditions, the middle leg was able to perform stepping-like movements on a treadband with the two free joints, the CTr- and the FTi-joints, (for more details, see Fischer et al. 2001; Gabriel et al. 2003). Sequences of stepping movements were elicited by touching the abdomen of the animal with a paint brush. During the experiments, the animals were tested under different sensory conditions with the CS being destroyed in the course of the experiment. This was made possible as the whole experimental setup, including the foam platform with the animal, treadband and the hook electrodes, could be rotated without changing their relative positions to each other. To achieve this, the experimental setup was positioned on a turnable metal plate. Thus it was possible to have view and access to all groups of CS on the trochanterofemur. Individual groups of CS were destroyed by pushing a ﬁne insect pin through the pit in the cuticle where the CS are located (Schmitz 1993). Afterward walking sequences were again elicited. In six experiments, all trochantero- femoral CS groups were ablated at once, whereas in other experi- ments, the CS groups were destroyed sequentially. In four experi- ments, the three groups of trCS were destroyed ﬁrst, followed by fCS destruction. In four other experiments, the fCS were destroyed ﬁrst, followed by trCS destruction. Experiments on restrained animals In one set of experiments, the effect of the femoro-trochanteral CS on the TC-joint motoneuronal activity was tested in the partially denervated mesothoracic ganglion, which was denervated except for the innervation of the CS and the anterior and posterior connective nerves. To do so, the lateral nerves were cut except for the nervus cruris (ncr). Nerves originating from the ncr in the coxa, nerves C1 and C2, were also cut. In addition, the ncr was also cut within the femur just distally to the fCS. After this denervation procedure, all sensory input from and motor output to the periphery were excluded except for inputs from the trCS and the fCS. In these preparations, the left middle leg was ﬁxed in a way that it extended over the platform. The femur was attached to a piezoelectric element that was driven by a ramp generator (electronic workshop, University of Cologne). To adequately stimulate the CS, the femur was slightly bent horizontally in caudal and rostral direction with amplitudes of 200-340 /H9262m (Schmitz 1993). The protractor and the retractor motoneuronal activ- ity was recorded extracellularly from the nerve stumps nl2 and nl5 by means of hook electrodes (Schmitz et al. 1988). Data analysis Intra- and extracellular recordings and the treadband signal were stored on a computer by using an A/D converter (CED 1401plus 43ROLE OF CUTICULAR STRAIN SENSORS FOR INTERJOINT COORDINATION J Neurophysiol • VOL 92 • JULY 2004 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. interface, Cambridge Electronic) on-line. The recordings were ana- lyzed off-line with the Spike2 software (Version 3.13). Statistical evaluation of data and plotting of graphs was done with Excel 97. /H11032N/H11032 gives the number of experiments and n gives the sample size. The /H92732 test of Brandt-Snedecor was used for tests for signi ﬁcance of differ- ences. RESULTS In the single-middle-leg preparation, the stick insect per- forms stepping-like movements with clear distinct stance and swing phases of the middle leg (Fig. 1 A) (cf. Fischer et al. 2001; Karg et al. 1991). During the stance phase, the animal pulls the treadband toward the body; at the onset of the swing phase, the leg is lifted off the treadband and extended back to a more distal position, where it touches down onto the tread- band prior to the next stance (see also: Ba¨ssler 1993; Fischer et al. 2001). During these stepping-like movements, the activities of motoneurons innervating the ProCx and RetCx muscles, which in vivo would move the leg in anterior and posterior directions at the TC-joint, are tightly coupled to the stepping movements of the more distal coxa-trochanter (CTr), femur- tibia (FTi), and tibia-tarsus joints (Fig. 1 B) (cf. Fischer et al. 2001). In the present paper, we show that this coordination is predominantly due to sensory in ﬂuences arising from load measuring sense organs of the walking leg. In particular, the CS located on the trochanter — the trCS (Hofmann and Ba¨ssler 1982; Schmitz 1993) — contribute to this interjoint coordina- tion. Contribution of signals from the CS to the activity pattern of the thorax-coxa joint motoneurons during single-leg stepping Figure 1 B shows a stepping sequence together with extra- cellular recordings of the activities of ProCx and RetCx mo- toneurons as well as an intracellular recording from a single ProCx motoneuron. At the start of each stance, ongoing ProCx motoneuronal activity is terminated and RetCx motoneuronal activity is initiated. RetCx activity continues throughout the stance phase. At the end of the stance phase, the RetCx motoneuronal activity terminates and activity switches over again to ProCx motoneurons. The intracellular recording of the ProCx motoneuron exempliﬁes that activation and inactivation of ProCx motoneurons is paralleled by strong depolarizations and hyperpolarizations in membrane potential. Generally, this rigid and ﬁxed coupling of activity in the thoraco-coxal mo- toneuron pools with the stepping pattern performed by the distal leg joints was observed in all experimental animals in FIG.1 . A: schematics showing the movement of the leg during stance and swing in the single middle leg preparation of the stick insect (see also Fischer et al. 2001). B: recording of activity in TC-joint motoneurons during single-leg step- ping. Note that the activities of protractor coxae (ProCx, 3rd trace) and the retractor coxae (RetCx, 2nd trace) motoneurons are coordinated with the stepping movement performed by the more distal leg joints indicated by the treadband trace (see text, 1st trace). During stance the tread- band is pulled toward the animal, and the tread- band trace is deﬂected upward. The bottom trace shows an intracellular recording of a ProCx mo- toneuron. Please note that Graham and Wendler (1981) reported that the ProCx is innervated by /H113508 excitatory motoneurons the axons of which travel in the nerve nl2, while the RetCx is inner- vated by /H113507 motoneurons the axons of which travel in the nerve nl5. C: recording of activity of ProCx and the RetCx motor nerves, with the single-leg stepping before ( left, CS intact) and after removal of the CS (right, all CS destroyed). Please note that ablation of the campaniform sen- sillae (CS) diminishes the speci ﬁc coupling of coxal motoneuronal activity to the stepping movement of the distal segments. Two sections of recordings with 3 steps each with CS intact (left) and CS destroyed ( right) from the same preparation are shown. D: Histograms of relative activity of ProCx ( /H17040) and RetCx ( 1) vs. normal- ized stance-phase for data from 6 experiments (see text for evaluation). Notice that the coordi- nated TC-joint motoneuronal activity in the intact leg (left) is diminished after destruction of all of the CS ( right). 44 T. AKAY, S. HAEHN, J. SCHMITZ, AND A. BU ¨SCHGES J Neurophysiol • VOL 92 • JULY 2004 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. which the CS were kept intact (Fig. 1 C, left; N /H1100511 experi- ments with extracellular recordings, N /H110053 experiments with intra- and extracellular recordings). Whereas /H1101184% of all steps performed by the animals showed a clear-cut alternating activ- ity pattern (Fig. 4, left), in the remaining 16% of the steps, coxal motoneuronal activity was less clearly modulated. For example, in some stance phases, either no clear burst was detectable in RetCx motoneurons or ProCx and RetCx activity showed multiple transitions throughout one stance phase. The general coupling of coxal motoneuronal activity to the stepping movements of the distal leg segments, observed in the majority of the steps, is also re ﬂected by plotting histograms of the relative thoraco-coxal motoneuronal activity as a function of stance phase for all steps generated (Fig. 1D, left). To do so, the start of the treadband movement was deﬁned as the start of leg stance. For six experime