J Physiol 590.22 (2012) pp 5809–5826 5809 The Journal of Physiology Neuroscience Vestibular-mediated synaptic inputs and pathways to sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the neonatal mouse Nedim Kasumacic, Joel C. Glover and Marie-Claude Perreault Laboratory of Neural Development and Optical Recording (NDEVOR), Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, N-0317 Oslo, Norway Key points • When the body is tilted from horizontal to vertical, blood tends to accumulate in the legs, and blood pressure may fall in the upper body and head, a phenomenon known as orthostatic hypotension. • The vestibulosympathetic reﬂexes triggered by stimulation of vestibular afferents help to counteract orthostatic hypotension, especially during its initial onset. • W e used an ex vivo preparation of the brainstem and spinal cord of the neonatal mouse, and high-throughput optical recording to assess when vestibulosympathetic projections become functional postnatally. • V estibulosympathetic synaptic connections are present in the mouse, and are already functional at birth. The organization of the projections includes many of the key features seen in adult mammals. • The demonstration of similarity between vestibulosympathetic pathways in mice and other mammals is exciting because mouse models provide the possibility to use powerful molecular genetic techniques to make discoveries that may be very relevant for human vestibulo-autonomic dysfunction. Abstract T o assess when vestibulosympathetic projections become functional postnatally, and to establish a preparation in which vestibulosympathetic circuitry can be characterized more precisely, we used an optical approach to record VIIIth nerve-evoked synaptic inputs to thoracic sympathetic preganglionic neurons (SPNs) in newborn mice. Stimulation of the VIIIth nerve was performed in an isolated brainstem–spinal cord preparation after retrogradely labelling with the ﬂuorescent calcium indicator Calcium Green 1-conjugated dextran amine, the SPNs and the somatic motoneurons (MNs) in the thoracic (T) segments T2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12. Synaptically mediated calcium responses could be visualized and recorded in individual SPNs and MNs, and analysed with respect to latency, temporal pattern, magnitude and synaptic pharmacology. VIIIth nerve stimulation evoked responses in all SPNs and MNs investigated. The SPN responses had onset latencies from 90 to 200 ms, compared with much shorter latencies in MNs, and were completely abolished by mephenesin, a drug that preferentially reduces polysynaptic over mono- synaptic transmission. Bicuculline and picrotoxin, but not strychnine, increased the magnitudes of the SPN responses without changing the onset latencies, suggesting a convergence of concomitant excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs. Lesions strategically placed to test the involvement of direct vestibulospinal pathways versus indirect pathways within the brainstem showed that vestibulosympathetic inputs in the neonate are mediated predominantly, if not exclusively, by J. C. Glover and M-C. Perreault contributed equally to this work. C© 2012 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology C© 2012 The Physiological Society DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.234609 5810 N. Kasumacic and others J Physiol 590.22 the latter. Thus, already at birth, synaptic connections in the vestibulosympathetic reﬂex are functional and require the involvement of the ventrolateral medulla as in adult mammals. (Received 16 April 2012; accepted after revision 29 August 2012; ﬁrst published online 3 September 2012) Corresponding authors J. C. Glover: Department of Physiology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, PB 1103 Blindern, N-0317, Oslo, Norway. Email: joel.glover@medisin.uio.no; M-C. Perreault: Department of Physiology, Emory University, School of Medicine, Whitehead Biomedical Research Building, 615 Michael Street, Atlanta, GA 0322, USA. Email: m-c.perreault@emory.edu Abbreviations 2T, twice the current threshold; aCSF, artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid; CGDA, Calcium Green 1-conjugated dextran amine; CIN, commissural interneuron; cMVST, contralateral medial vestibulospinal tract; CVLM, caudal ventrolateral medulla; iMVST, ipsilateral medial vestibulospinal tract; L VN, lateral vestibular nucleus; L VST, lateral vestibulospinal tract; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; MN, motoneuron; MVST, medial vestibulospinal tract; RDA, rhodamine dextran amine; ROI, region of interest; RVLM, rostral ventrolateral medulla; SPN, sympathetic preganglionic neuron; sGVS, sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation; T, thoracic. Introduction When the body is tilted from horizontal to vertical, blood tends to accumulate in the legs, and blood p r e s s u r em a yf a l li nt h eu p p e rb o d ya n dh e a d , a phenomenon known as orthostatic hypotension. Normally, compensatory mechanisms including the baroreceptor reﬂex, contraction of leg muscles and the negative thoracic pressure created by inspiration work in synergy to counteract orthostatic hypotension. However, the earliest phase of compensation occurs too quickly to be explained by these mechanisms, indicating an anti- cipatory mechanism that reads body tilt more rapidly. It is now well established that the vestibular system has inﬂuence over the sympathetic nervous system and cardiovascular control (reviewed in Y ates, 1996; Y ates & Bronstein, 2005; Wilson et al. 2006; Holstein et al. 2011). Thus, vestibulosympathetic reﬂexes triggered by stimulation of vestibular afferents are now considered to constitute the rapid compensatory component that counteracts orthostatic hypotension. In the ﬁrst study that proposed a connection between the vestibular system and the sympathetic nervous system, it was shown that bilateral transection of the vestibular nerves in cats greatly compromised their ability to compensate for orthostatic hypotension (Doba & Reis, 1974). More recently this effect has been shown to have a regional character (reviewed in Kerman et al. 2000a), with compensation in hindlimb vasculature much more dependent on intact vestibular afferents than compensation in forelimb vasculature (Kerman et al. 2000b;W i l s o n et al. 2006). Studies in rodents and humans have indicated that attenuation of vestibular afferent signals in the elderly and in post-ﬂight astronauts may be responsible for the orthostatic intolerance that these subjects experience (Buckey et al. 1996; Ray & Monahan, 2002; Etard et al. 2004). Several studies in cats have shown that electrical or natural stimulation of vestibular afferents inﬂuences the ﬁring rate of sympathetic nerves (sympathetic chain, muscle sympathetic efferents, cervical, splanchnic and renal nerves) through combined excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs (reviewed in Y ates, 1992; Kerman et al. 2000a). Binaural low-frequency sinusoidal galvanic vestibular stimulation (sGVS) in rats, which preferentially activates otolith-responsive vestibular pathways, leads to a transient drop followed by oscillations in blood pressure and heart rate (Cohen et al. 2011). Similar results (using electrical, caloric or natural stimulation) have been obtained in human studies (reviewed in Ray & Carter, 2003; Carter & Ray, 2008; Holstein et al. 2012). While there is ample evidence that vestibular inputs inﬂuence the sympathetic nervous system, the under- lying neural pathways that mediate this are not completely understood. Lesion studies in the cat have identiﬁed a region within the vestibular nuclear complex situated partly in the medial nucleus and partly in the inferior nucleus that is necessary for vestibulosympathetic control (Y ateset al. 1993; Y ates & Miller, 1994). However, there is currently no evidence suggesting a direct mono- synaptic connection between vestibular neurons and sympathetic preganglionic neurons (SPNs). A model has been proposed based on anatomical and electro- physiological evidence in which vestibulosympathetic inﬂuence is mediated by vestibular neurons that project onto a network of neurons in the rostral and caudal ventrolateral medulla (RVLM and CVLM) as well as the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS; reviewed in Y ates, 1996; Balaban & Porter, 1998; Y ates & Bronstein, 2005; Holstein et al. 2011). Neurons in the RVLM appear to be the principal source of the descending axons that mediate the vestibulosympathetic responses (Lee et al. 2007; Abbott et al. 2009), and have been shown to make monosynaptic and polysynaptic excitatory (glutamatergic) and inhibitory (GABAergic) connections onto SPNs (Deuchars et al. 1995, 1997). Another potential pathway involved is a vestibulo-raphespinal projection that has been demonstrated anatomically and electro- physiologically (Bacon et al. 1990; Y ateset al. 1993; Porter & Balaban, 1997; see however Iigaya et al. 2007). C© 2012 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology C© 2012 The Physiological Society J Physiol 590.22 Imaging vestibular inputs to sympathetic preganglionic neurons 5811 Although these studies have provided a description of neural substrates sufﬁcient and in some cases necessary to mediate the vestibulosympathetic reﬂex in the cat, less is known about the organization of this reﬂex in other mammalian species. A few studies have begun to investigate the vestibulosympathetic reﬂex in the rat, demonstrating its contribution to the maintenance of blood pressure during gravitational stress (Gotoh et al. 2004; T anaka et al. 2006; Abe et al. 2008) and its response to sGVS (Cohen et al. 2011). Other studies have demonstrated the expression of activity-dependent immediate-early gene expression in subpopulations of medial, descending and superior vestibular nuclei neurons in response to sGVS in the rat (Holstein et al. 2012), and shown that some neurons in the descending vestibular nucleus and caudal half of the medial vestibular nucleus contain imidazoleacetic acid-ribotide, a putative neuro- transmitter for blood pressure regulation (Friedrich et al. 2007; Martinelli et al. 2007). Recent efforts have also been made to characterize the sympathetic effects of neurochemically deﬁned subpopulations of RVLM neurons (Burke et al. 2011). An important advance would be to characterize vestibulosympathetic circuitry in the mouse because of the opportunities for trans- genic manipulation, including optogenetic recording and stimulation approaches (reviewed in Zhang et al. 2007). An additional issue that has not yet been addressed is the ontogeny of the vestibulosympathetic reﬂex and its underlying circuitry. This can also be characterized in the mouse, which lends itself well to both anatomical and physiological studies of bulbospinal projections in embryos and neonates (Auclair et al. 1999; Pasqualetti et al. 2007; Szokol et al. 2008; Szokol & Perreault, 2009, and see below). Here, we begin to investigate the functional organization of the murine vestibulosympathetic connections using an ex vivo preparation of the brain- stem and spinal cord of the neonatal mouse that permits high-throughput optical recording of synaptically evoked calcium responses in spinal neurons (Szokol et al. 2008, 2011; Szokol & Perreault, 2009; Kasumacic et al. 2010). W e have found that electrical stimulation of the VIIIth nerve evokes calcium responses in SPNs throughout the thoracic cord. A variety of lesions within the brainstem and upper cervical cord indicate the involvement of an indirect descending pathway with a relay within the ventro- lateral medulla, as has been proposed in adult mammals. The inability to induce the same responses by direct stimulation of the lateral vestibulospinal tract (L VST) supports this conclusion. Long response latencies similar to those demonstrated in the adult cat (Y ates et al. 1995), together with pharmacological experiments using selective application of mephenesin to the spinal cord, indicate that the spinal component of the indirect pathway may also be polysynaptic. An increase in response magnitude during pharmacological blockade of GABA receptors within the spinal cord indicates the presence of both inhibitory and excitatory components. Preliminary accounts of this work have been reported elsewhere (Kasumacic et al. 2009, 2010). Methods Animals and brainstem–spinal cord preparation Experiments were performed on newborn mice of the ICR strain ( n = 70), at postnatal days (P) 0–5. Mice were deeply anaesthetized with isoﬂurane (Abbott, Scandinavia AB, Solna, Sweden) and decerebrated at the level of the superior colliculus. Decerebration was followed by rapid dissection of the brainstem and spinal cord using the same procedure as described in Kasumacic et al. (2010). All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used in accordance with the European Communities Council directive 86/609/EEC, and the National Institutes of Health guidelines for the care and use of animals. All procedures were approved by the National Animal Research Authority in Norway (Forsøksdyrutvalget). Retrograde labelling of SPNs and somatic motoneurons (MNs) with ﬂuorescent calcium indicator After dissection the preparation was placed in oxygenated artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (aCSF) containing in m M: NaCl, 128; KCl, 3; D-glucose 11; CaCl 2, 2.5; MgSO 4, 1; NaH 2PO4,1 . 2 ;H e p e s ,5 ;N a H C O3, 25. SPNs and somatic MNs in the thoracic cord (T2, T4, T6, T8, T10 and/or T12 segments) were labelled retrogradely by applying crystals of Calcium Green 1-conjugated dextran amine (CGDA; 3000 MW; Life T echnologies Ltd, Paisley, United Kingdom) to the cut ventral roots (Glover 1995). Retrograde labelling continued in the dark at room temperature (23–25◦C) for 3 h. Optical recording of calcium responses Brainstem–spinal cord preparations were transferred to a Sylgard-coated chamber and pinned ventral side up with stainless steel (Minuten) pins inserted through the peeled dura mater. Prior to transferring to the recording chamber, an oblique transection (about 45 deg from the horizontal) was performed at the level of the segment containing the CGDA-labelled neurons (see Szokol & Perreault, 2009; Szokol et al. 2011 for more details). The transected end was slightly bent and positioned on a trapezoidal block of Sylgard glued to the bottom of the chamber so that the obliquely cut surface lay C© 2012 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology C© 2012 The Physiological Society 5812 N. Kasumacic and others J Physiol 590.22 horizontally under the objective (Fig. 1 A). In some pre- parations, SPNs and somatic MNs were labelled in three different thoracic segments (n = 9). In these preparations, oblique cuts were made sequentially starting ﬁrst with the most caudal segment. Subsequent oblique cuts were performed only after completing optical recording from the caudalmost segments. During recording, labelled neurons were imaged using a 40 × water immersion Figure 1. Brainstem–spinal cord preparation and effective stimulation parameters A, schematic representation of the brainstem–spinal cord preparation indicating the segments and neuron groups studied. Inset shows an image of the glass suction electrode placed on the proximal end of the cut VIIIth nerve for electrical stimulation. Shown to the right are schematic illustrations of the obliquely cut spinal cord with the transverse surface facing up towards the objective. Inset shows an image of CGDA-labelled SPNs, pseudocoloured as described in Methods, in a transverse section of the T10 segment. Scale bars: 100 μm; D, dorsal; M, medial. B and C, effective stimulation parameters for evoking Ca 2+ responses in sympathetic preganglionic neurons (SPNs) in T10. The graph in B displays the magnitudes of the responses produced by stimulating the VIIIth nerve at threshold current (T) with a 5 s train as a function of frequency. Each response is an average of 4 experiments (4–8 SPNs per experiment). The graph in C displays the magnitude–frequency curves when stimulating at 2T with a 5 s train, and the response magnitudes as a function of the train duration when stimulating at 2T and 5 Hz (individual open circles). Each response is an average (total of 4 experiments, 4–9 SPNs per experiment) and is expressed as a percentage of the response at 5 Hz. All values are means ± standard deviations. C© 2012 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology C© 2012 The Physiological Society J Physiol 590.22 Imaging vestibular inputs to sympathetic preganglionic neurons 5813 objective (LUMPlanFl, 0.8 NA, Olympus, Norway) on an upright epi-ﬂuorescence microscope (Axioskop FS 2, Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with a 100 W halogen lamp and excitation (band-pass 450–490 nm) and emission (long-pass 515 nm) ﬁlters, and the preparation was perfused continuously with oxygenated aCSF at a r a t eo f7 . 5m lm i n−1 (total volume exchange every 2 min). Fluorescence intensity changes elicited by stimulation (Ca2+ responses) were registered using a cooled CCD camera (Cascade 650, Photometrics, T exas Instruments, USA) mounted on a video zoom adaptor, using the image-processing software Metamorph 7.7 (Universal Imaging Corporation, Molecular Devices, USA). Image series were routinely acquired at 4 frames s−1 and a binning of 3 × 3. However, in some experiments (n = 10) we used a higher frame rate (100 frames s −1) and higher binning (6 × 6) to record latencies of the responses at higher temporal resolution. High frame rate recordings could not be performed for long periods because they require higher intensity illumination, which rapidly photobleaches the CGDA. Electrical stimulation The entire eighth (VIIIth) cranial nerve was stimulated electrically with a suction electrode made from borosilicate glass (Harvard Apparatus, Kent, UK; cat. no. 30–0056). Nerve stimulation consisted of 5 s trains (200 μs pulse duration) at 5 Hz, with a current strength between 60 and 250 μA. In an additional series of experiments ( n = 18), we stimulated the L VST group, which is the source of the L VST, lying principally within the lateral vestibular nucleus (LVN; D´ıazet al. 2003; Pasqualetti et al. 2007; and references therein) using a monopolar tungsten micro- electrode (Parylene-coated, shaft diameter 0.254 mm, tip diameter 1–2 μm, impedance 0.1 M /Omega1at 1 kHz; WPI, USA). T o gain access to the L VN, we ﬁrst carefully removed the cerebellum and the dura mater on the dorsal surface of the brainstem. For L VST group stimulation, we used the same parameters as for VIIIth nerve stimulation, except that current strengths were lower (50–200 μA, mean = 65 μA). The locations of stimulation sites in the L VN were conﬁrmed histologically after making electro- lytic lesions (see Szokol & Perreault, 2009 for details). In some of these preparations (n = 4), we compared directly the location of the electrolytic lesion to the location of the L VST neurons by labelling these retrogradely on the side opposite to the stimulation by applying crystals of rhodamine dextran amine (RDA; 3 kDa; Life T echnologies Ltd, Paisley, United Kingdom) to their trans- ected axons in the ventral and ventrolateral funiculi at C1 immediately after making the electrolytic lesion. In 3 out of 18 preparations we also blocked glutamatergic synapses selectively in the brainstem using kynurenic acid (see below). Pharmacological experiments After isolating the brainstem and the spinal cord with a V aseline barrier made at the C1 level, bicuculline (20 μM; T ocris, Bristol, UK), picrotoxin (40 μM; Sigma, St. Louis, USA), strychnine (0.2 μM; Sigma) or mephenesin (1 m M; Sigma) were superfused into the compartment containing the spinal cord; or kynurenic acid (5 mM, Sigma) was superfused into the compartment containing the brainstem. The tightness of the barrier was veriﬁed by adding the dyes Phenol Red or Fast Green to one of the compartments at the end of the experiment. Recordings were started 10 min after drug application. Spinal cord, medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) and medullary lesions Spinal cord