ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 04 April 2017 doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2017.00018 Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 1 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 18 Edited by: Poramate Manoonpong, University of Southern Denmark Odense, Denmark Reviewed by: Daniel P . Ferris, University of Michigan, USA Horacio Rostro Gonzalez, Universidad de Guanajuato, Mexico *Correspondence: Alexander Hunt ajh26@pdx.edu Received: 25 November 2016 Accepted: 15 March 2017 Published: 04 April 2017 Citation: Hunt A, Szczecinski N and Quinn R (2017) Development and Training of a Neural Controller for Hind Leg Walking in a Dog Robot. Front. Neurorobot. 11:18. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2017.00018 Development and Training of a Neural Controller for Hind Leg Walking in a Dog Robot Alexander Hunt 1*, Nicholas Szczecinski 2 and Roger Quinn 2 1 Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Portl and State University, Portland, OR, USA, 2 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Case Western Reserv e University, Cleveland, OH, USA Animals dynamically adapt to varying terrain and small pert urbations with remarkable ease. These adaptations arise from complex interactions be tween the environment and biomechanical and neural components of the animal’ s bod y and nervous system. Research into mammalian locomotion has resulted in several neural and neuro-mechanical models, some of which have been tested in s imulation, but few “synthetic nervous systems” have been implemented in physi cal hardware models of animal systems. One reason is that the implementation into a physical system is not straightforward. For example, it is difﬁcult to make roboti c actuators and sensors that model those in the animal. Therefore, even if the sensorimot or circuits were known in great detail, those parameters would not be applicable an d new parameter values must be found for the network in the robotic model of the anima l. This manuscript demonstrates an automatic method for setting parameter val ues in a synthetic nervous system composed of non-spiking leaky integrator neuron mod els. This method works by ﬁrst using a model of the system to determine required moto r neuron activations to produce stable walking. Parameters in the neural system are then tuned systematically such that it produces similar activations to the desired pattern determined using expected sensory feedback. We demonstrate that the developed method successfully produces adaptive locomotion in the rear legs of a dog-like robot actu ated by artiﬁcial muscles. Furthermore, the results support the validity of current models of mammalian locomotion. This research will serve as a basis for testing more complex l ocomotion controllers and for testing speciﬁc sensory pathways and biomechanical designs. Additionally, the developed method can be used to automatically adapt the neur al controller for different mechanical designs such that it could be used to control diff erent robotic systems. Keywords: central pattern generator, dog, artiﬁcial muscle , locomotion, walking 1. INTRODUCTION Controlling complex robots using traditional control methods with on-line optimization and “single brain” control becomes increasingly diﬃcult and computationally intensive as more degrees of freedom and more points of contact are added. This is in stark contrast with the animal kingdom, in which high redundancy is the norm, and complex interactions with the environment are often accomplished with ease. For example, having more feet on the ground makes an individual animal’s Hunt et al. Neural Controller for a Dog Robot control and balance easier, rather than harder. Big or small , it takes little mental eﬀort on the part of the animal to change fro m fast speeds to slow speeds, change gaits, start turning, step o ver an object, respond to ground slip, or move from concrete to loose dirt. Unfortunately, animals are immensely complex, and the majority of our current robots barely resemble any animals i n the world today. Instead of muscles for actuation, our most agile robots use electric motors ( Seok et al., 2015 ) or hydraulics (Raibert et al., 2008; Boaventura et al., 2013 ). For determining body states and sensing the world, modern robots rely on a few strategically placed sensors instead of an animal’s wide net of somatic sensory neurons spread across its whole body. For control, instead of a highly distributed and hierarchical n etwork of neurons, a single algorithm is often used to calculate the exact position of each joint needed to maintain stability and provid e locomotion. All this is beginning to change however, as details on how biomechanics and neural systems provide advantages to movin g around in the world are being uncovered. The compliant nature of muscles can automatically reject perturbations an d signiﬁcantly reduce the burden on the control system ( Loeb et al., 1999; Jindrich and Full, 2002 ). To take advantage of this, actuators which add compliance and greater control of force are being developed ( Pratt and Williamson, 1995; Thorson and Caldwell, 2011; Rollinson et al., 2013; Schilling et al., 2013 b). A compliant actuator combined with the tri-segmented shape of the legs (Fischer and Blickhan, 2006 ) produces a mechanical system which is robust to perturbations capable of performing dynamic walking with open-loop control ( Spröwitz et al., 2014). Neural control of locomotion is a complex interaction of rhythm generation, sensory processing, feed-forward muscl e activation, and sensory feedback systems. Central pattern generators (CPGs) are sub-circuits located in the spinal cor d which are responsible for repetitive behaviors such as walking and breathing. CPGs are capable of oscillating and providing a patterned output either with or without external input. CPGs coordinate complex muscle activations to help the animal achieve proper timing to accomplish a given task. They have been found to be involved in a large variety of movement behaviors including the leech heartbeat ( Arbas and Calabrese, 1987), human breathing and gasping ( Tryba et al., 2006 ), lobster digestion ( Meyrand et al., 1994 ), turtle scratching ( Mortin and Stein, 1989 ), and locomotion in stick insects ( Bässler and Büschges, 1998 ), lamprey ( Cohen et al., 1992 ), cats ( Brown, 1914), and mice (Hägglund et al., 2013). Modeling of these circuits show that CPGs coordinate multiple segments into predictable patterns during locomotio n through entrainment of the CPG to the mechanical systems the y control ( Iwasaki and Zheng, 2006; Markin et al., 2010 ). For example, a set of CPGs that are coupled similarly to that of a lamprey have been shown to produce a traveling wave along the body that provides forward locomotion ( Ekeberg, 1993 ). It was shown that this wave can be easily modiﬁed by sensory feedback to allow the model to adapt to its surroundings and produce more robust waves for both water and land ( Ekeberg and Grillner, 1999; Ijspeert et al., 1999; Bicanski et al., 20 13). Similar evidence has shown that sensory feedback can be used to coordinate multiple CPGs in leech swimming and stick insec t, cricket, and cockroache walking without direct coupling of t he CPGs (Bässler and Büschges, 1998; Ekeberg et al., 2004; Akay and Büschges, 2006; Chen et al., 2011; Szczecinski et al., 2014 ). Less is known about the organization of CPGs in mammals than in insects and other invertebrates. Early theories hypothesized the existence of a single CPG per leg, driving transitions between stance and swing ( Brown, 1914 ). However, more recent models utilize multiple oscillating circuits at multiple hierarchical levels (McCrea and Rybak, 2008) supported by recent neurological data ( Zhong et al., 2012 ). Mammalian CPG systems may look more similar to those in insects than previously hypothesized ( Büschges and Borgmann, 2013 ). Models of CPGs coordinated through sensory feedback pathways have been shown to successfully replicate many behaviors in mammalian systems and produce coordinate motion for multiple joints ( Ekeberg and Pearson, 2005; Amrollah and Henaﬀ, 2010; Markin et al., 2010; Hunt et al., 2014, 2015a; Li et al., 2016 ). However, these models have not been tested on a robot, and it is diﬃcult to determine whether they are true in real world physics or possibly exploiting the simpliﬁed physics of a simulation. These advances in understanding of the neuro-mechanical control of locomotion have led to an increase in bio-inspired robots (see Ijspeert, 2008, 2014; Iada and Ijspeert, 2016 for recent reviews) with simultaneous goals of building more advanced and adaptable robots in addition to developing a bett er understanding of the theories produced from the experimental work. Modern biologically inspired walking robots fall into on e of two categories: abstracted biologically-inspired or biol ogy- ﬁrst. Several abstracted biologically-inspired approaches ha ve eﬀectively demonstrated many principles of animal locomotion. Hopf oscillator-driven robots such as Amphibot and Salamandra Robotica II provide valuable insights into how changing sensor y feedback can be used to adapt CPGs and produce rhythmic movement entrained to the mechanics of the robot and its surrounding ( Crespi et al., 2005, 2013 ). AMOS and HECTOR are two robots which are built around machine learning of speciﬁc tasks. AMOS is controlled by a large recurrent neural network trained by reservoir computing methods to estimate t he leg’s state and anticipate future sensory information ( Dasgupta et al., 2015 ). HECTOR uses many feedforward artiﬁcial neural networks to map between diﬀerent states, such as mapping joint angles to the height of a leg ( Schilling et al., 2013a ). Both these robots are also able to eﬀectively integrate sensory information to produce adaptive, rhythmic output. Additionally, several robo ts have been controlled with dynamic spiking neural networks (Rostro-Gonzalez et al., 2015; Espinal et al., 2016 ). All these robots produce adaptive locomotion over diverse terrain, but their controllers abstract many principles of animals’ nervou s systems, limiting their applications as neurobiological rese arch tools. Other robots use a biology-ﬁrst approach to controller design. Biology-ﬁrst approaches begin with known connectivity from the animal, and set parameter values in the control networks to match data from the animal. RoboLobster, Bill-Ant and Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 2 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 18 Hunt et al. Neural Controller for a Dog Robot LegConNet control walking with ﬁnite state controllers bas ed on previous state-based models of locomotion ( Ayers, 2004; Lewinger and Quinn, 2010; Rutter et al., 2011 ). Locomotion direction is changed by modifying local reﬂexes that cause transitions between the ﬁnite states of leg motion. OCTA VIO uses an artiﬁcial neural network assembled from modular subnetworks, much like the work we present in this paper ( von Twickel et al., 2011 ). The biped built by Klein and Lewis and Redbot both demonstrated how a spiking neural network can be used to produce locomotion in a biped robot ( Klein and Lewis, 2012). These robots have controllers that mimic the logic and structure of the animal’s nervous systems, and as such, serv e as tools for investigating neurobiological hypotheses, how ever, all these controllers were developed by hand tuning parameter values, and are limited by the engineer’s ability to calibra te the system. To improve the applicability and performance of these robots, methods are being developed for setting parameter values in these networks. A major component of these methods focus on breaking the problem into several more easily solved subproblems. These subproblems are solved individually, and often in a speciﬁc order to build up the complexity of the network. Redbot uses a staged genetic algorithm process to set stepping frequency, gait, and ﬁnally joint angle proﬁles ( Russell et al., 2007 ). This controller, however, does not use sensory feedback, an important component for adaptive locomotion. The controller for MantisBot, and is formulated around stea dy state activity of the neural system, however, walking has not yet been demonstrated with this robot ( Szczecinski et al., 2015 ). In previous work, we developed a training process which utilizes many of the same tools as MantisBot ( Szczecinski et al., 2017 ) and sets parameter values in a locomotory network for forward locomotion of a rat simulation ( Hunt et al., 2015b ). In the work presented in this paper, we demonstrate the broader applicabilit y of this process by applying the same procedure to a dog-like robot to generate adaptive, forward walking. The key contributions of this paper are (1) the testing of a synthetic nervous system for dynamic walking on a hardware model of a dog’s rear legs actuated by artiﬁcial muscles, and (2) the validation of an automatic, repeatable method for settin g parameter values in a synthetic neural system composed of a CPG locomotion network without requiring a mechanical simulation. Additionally, this work demonstrates the vali dity of using synthetic neural controllers for controlling dyna mic robotic locomotion and acts as a launching point for developin g more complex controllers for adaptive locomotion. 2. METHODS 2.1. Robot Architecture Puppy ( Figure 1) is a four legged robot with 12 planar joint degrees of freedom (three per leg), ﬁrst introduced inAschenbeck et al. (2006) . It is 57.5 cm tall, 60 cm long, 23 cm wide, and weighs 6.8 kg (15 lbs). Each joint has an antagonistic pair of 10 mm Festo MXAM-10-AA (Festo Inc.) actuators, also known as “ﬂuidic artiﬁcial muscles, ” that are energized by compres sed air. Motion is constrained to the sagittal plane by two plastic sheets (see Figure 1). A 2.3 kg (5 lb) counterweight was hung through a pulley on a linear slider and attached to the center of the robot, partially supporting the robot’s weight for the tri als presented in this manuscript. The robot’s hind legs walked on the treadmill. The front legs were suspended above the belt to prevent interference. Each actuator has separate input and exhaust valves controlled by a single board real-time, reconﬁgurable input output module , sbRIO-9602 (National Instruments), with an embedded ﬁeld programmable gate array (FPGA). The sbRIO was connected via a 10/100 Ethernet port to a host computer running Windows 7 on an Intel i7-2770K. Each actuator is connected in parallel to a Freescale MPX5700 GP gauge pressure sensor. Joint angles are collected from a Vishay Spectrol 140-0-0-103 potentiomet er placed at each joint. Analog data from the joints and pressure sensors is converted to digital data for the sbRIO with a custom board developed by Osmisys, Inc. Velocity data, calculated by diﬀerentiating length data, was ﬁltered by a 2nd order lowpass Butterworth ﬁlter with a normalized cutoﬀ frequency of 0.01 H z, applied after diﬀerentiation. The overall control architecture is illustrated in Figure 2. The neural control system is simulated using Animatlab ( Cofer et al., 2010). The neural controller outputs motor neuron activations for each of the muscles and receives muscle aﬀerent feedback values via virtual serial ports with Labview. Labview uses the motor neuron values to calculate desired muscle force output and then calculates the pressure required to produce that forc e. Desired muscle force is calculated by adapting the Hill muscle model ( Hill, 1970 ) ( Figure 3) parameter values to the artiﬁcial muscle where tension, T, is developed in the muscle according to: dT dt = kse b ( kpex + b˙x − ( 1 + kpe kse ) ·T + A ) , (1) where x is the muscle length, kse and kpe are the series and parallel stiﬀness, and b is the viscous damping constant. A is the activation level of the muscle, A = Am ∗ Al. (2) Am is the sigmoid adapter equation, Am = Fmax 1 + exp(C(Vo − V)) + B . (3) Fmax is the maximum muscle force, C is the maximum slope of the sigmoid, V is the membrane voltage of the motor neuron, and Vo and B describe the voltage and force oﬀsets of the sigmoid. Al is the length-tension relationship, Al = 1 − (l − lrest)2 l2 width , (4) where lrest is the length at which the muscle can provide the most force and lwidth is the length from lrest at which the muscle can provide no force. Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 3 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 18 Hunt et al. Neural Controller for a Dog Robot FIGURE 1 | The robot is constrained to motion in the sagital pla ne and a counterweight pulley system is used to reduce the effe ctive weight of the robot and encourage a center position on the belt. FIGURE 2 | Diagram of control layout. The neural system is simulated on the computer in Animatlab ( Cofer et al., 2010 ). The neural controller uses muscle afferent feedback (Ia, Ib, and II) and internal neural dynamics to output m otor neuron activations in mV for each of the muscles via virt ual serial ports with Labview. Labview uses the motor neuron values and current readings of joint an gles to calculate desired pressure values and passes these t o the FPGA. It also uses the current pressure and joint angles to calculate the muscle afferent f eedback and passes this to Animatlab. The FPGA uses the curre nt pressure and desired pressure to perform bang-bang valve control on the actuators. It also pas ses the current pressure and angle readings from the robot to Labview. The series spring element, kse, simulates the tendon and is very stiﬀ (107N/m). kpe is calculated such that all stretching under the maximum expected load is absorbed by the parallel and series elements, kpe = kse ·Fmax kse(lmax − lmin) − Fmax . (5) To develop the length-tension relationship, the maximum output force was set to 509 N (based on extrapolation of the actuator ﬁt curve found in Hunt, 2015 at 90 psi). Length parameter values were unique for each muscle and set such that lrest was equal to the length with no pressure and no load, and the lwidth was set such that Al = 0 when the muscle was at its shortest length with no load under 90 psi. The peak velocity of the muscles (vmax) was calculated from empirical testing and used Frontiers in Neurorobotics | www.frontiersin.org 4 April 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 18 Hunt et al. Neural Controller for a Dog Robot FIGURE 3 | The Hill muscle model ( Hill, 1970) is modeled as an active contractile element in parallel with a damper and spring element. These components are attached in series with a stiffer spring elem ent approximating the tendon. to set b such that b = Fmax/vmax. The values Vo = − 50 mV, C = 121.46, and B = − 1.17 are found by solving Equation (3) for the conditions: Am(−100 mV) = 0; Am(−10 mV) = 0.99 ∗ Fmax; and Am(−50 mV) = 0.5 ∗ Fmax. The commanded pressure values are calculated from the empirical model of the actuators derived in Hunt (2015). In this model, the commanded tension from Animatlab and current geometry of the robot are used to calculate the commanded pressure for each of the artiﬁcial muscles with the equation P = 254 kPA + 1.23 kPA mN ·T + 15.6 kPA ·S+ 192 kPA ·tan ( 2.03 ( k −0.33 1 mN ·F + max(k) − 0.46 )) , (6) where S is the state of the artiﬁcial muscle in which 1 indicates the muscle is shortening and −1 indicates lengthening. For stability, this value was changed from the binary values calculated originally to continuous linearly scaled values based on th e maximum velocity of the muscle. This commanded pressure is sent to the FPGA. Because of limited bandwidth, the valve controller on the FPGA opens the inlet or exhaust valve until the actual pressure reading is within ±15 kPa of the commanded pressure, and then closes the valve. The sbRIO collects joint angle data and muscle pressure data and passes this information to the Labview computer program for processing. Labview converts the joint angle data to musc le lengths such that lm = am + bm cos (αm + θm) . (7) am, b m, and θm are unique cons