Afferent control of locomotor CPG: insights from a simple neuromechanical model Sergey N. Markin1, Alexander N. Klishko2, Natalia A. Shevtsova1, Michel A. Lemay1, Boris I. Prilutsky2, and Ilya A. Rybak1 1Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 2Center for Human Movement Studies, School of Applied Physiology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia Abstract A simple neuromechanical model has been developed that describes a spinal central pattern generator (CPG) controlling the locomotor movement of a single-joint limb via activation of two antagonist (flexor and extensor) muscles. The limb performs rhythmic movements under control of the muscular, gravitational and ground reaction forces. Muscle afferents provide length-dependent (types Ia and II) and force-dependent (type Ib from the extensor) feedback to the CPG. We show that afferent feedback adjusts CPG operation to the kinematics and dynamics of the limb providing stable “locomotion.” Increasing the supraspinal drive to the CPG increases locomotion speed by reducing the duration of stance phase. We show that such asymmetric, extensor-dominated control of locomotor speed (with relatively constant swing duration) is provided by afferent feedback independent of the asymmetric rhythmic pattern generated by the CPG alone (in “fictive locomotion” conditions). Finally, we demonstrate the possibility of reestablishing stable locomotion after removal of the supraspinal drive (associated with spinal cord injury) by increasing the weights of afferent inputs to the CPG, which is thought to occur following locomotor training. Keywords locomotion; central pattern generator; afferent control; spinal cord injury; recovery of locomotor function; modeling Introduction The mammalian spinal cord can generate locomotor activity in the absence of rhythmic inputs from higher brain centers and sensory feedback.1 These observations led to the concept of the locomotor central pattern generator (CPG) that is located in the spinal cord Address for correspondence: Dr. Ilya A. Rybak, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine, 2900 Queen Lane, Philadelphia, PA 19129. rybak@drexel.edu. Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interest. HHS Public Access Author manuscript Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Published in final edited form as: Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 June ; 1198: 21–34. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05435.x. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript and generates a primary locomotor rhythm and alternating pattern of motoneuron activations.2-5 Substantial evidence for this concept came from studies of “fictive locomotion,” in which sustained stimulation of the brain stem mesencephalic locomotor region in decerebrate, immobilized cats can evoke rhythmic locomotor activity with flexor- extensor and left-right alternations specific for locomotion.3-9 Fictive locomotion studies have also demonstrated that electrical stimulation of flexor and extensor afferents can modulate the fictive locomotor pattern, change the timing of locomotor phase transitions (and hence the durations of locomotor phases), control locomotor speed (i.e., overall step cycle duration), and produce various types of rhythm resetting.10-13 Although the spinal CPG can generate locomotor rhythm in the absence of sensory feedback, during normal overground locomotion it operates under feedback control. The latter plays a critical role in stabilizing the locomotor movement, contributes to weight support during stance phase, and adjusts the locomotor pattern to the biomechanical characteristics of limbs and body and the characteristics of the environment (terrain, obstacles, etc.).14,15 An important feature of normal overground locomotion in mammals, including cats,16,17 rats,18,19 and humans,20 is that the speed of locomotion normally changes due to a shortening of the stance (extensor) phase duration while the swing (flexor) phase duration remains relatively constant, which represents the so-called “extensor (or stance) phase dominance” in control of locomotion speed. In principle, the physiological basis for this extensor-dominated locomotion could derive from one (or combination) of the following21: (1) an extensor/flexor asymmetry in the organization of CPG per se,22,23 (2) an asymmetry in the descending drive from the brainstem to the flexor and extensor half-centers,24-26 or (3) afferent control of the CPG.21,27-31 Despite extensive studies in different animals and experimental preparations, this issue remains unresolved and is continuously debated in the literature.21,26,30 Another important issue is the potential role of afferent feedback in the recovery of locomotor function after spinal cord injury (SCI). Complete SCI results in the loss of descending propriospinal inputs from above the level of transection as well as supraspinal (cortical and brainstem) inputs to the CPG, which is expected to interrupt the normal CPG operation and hence to stop generation of locomotor oscillations.32-34 At the same time, many studies have provided evidence that locomotor function can be recovered by locomotor training alone or in combination with afferent stimulation or pharmacological treatment.4,15,35-39 It is commonly accepted that the recovery of locomotor function after SCI by locomotor training occurs, at least in part, due to an increase in the strength of afferent inputs to the CPG which re-enforces its operation despite the loss of supraspinal drive.4,15,35,36,38 However, the feasibility of such re-enforcement of the spinal CPG and locomotor pattern generation by afferent feedback after removal of supraspinal drive has never been theoretically investigated. In this study, we have developed a simple neuro-mechanical model that describes a locomotor CPG controlling the movement of a simple biomechanical system and used this model to investigate the possible role of afferent feedback from flexor and extensor muscles in the control of locomotor oscillations, including the extensor-dominated control of Markin et al. Page 2 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript locomotor speed, and in the recovery of locomotor function after the loss of supraspinal drive to the CPG (to model SCI conditions). Model description The model schematic is shown in Figure 1. The two-level half-center CPG represents a simplified version of a previous model6,7 and consists of a half-center rhythm generator (RG, containing flexor, RG-F, and extensor, RG-F, half-centers/neurons), pattern formation (PF) circuits (represented by PF-F and PF-E neurons) and inhibitory interneurons (In-F and In-E) which mediate reciprocal inhibition between flexor and extensor half-centers. The CPG receives tonic “supraspinal” drive and generates a basic “locomotor” rhythm providing alternating activation of flexor and extensor neurons within the CPG and alternating activation of flexor and extensor motoneurons (Mn-F and Mn-E). The controlled biomechanical system represents a simplified model of a single-joint limb described as a pendulum. The forces acting at the limb include: (1) forces of two antagonistic muscles (flexor, F, and extensor, E, activated by Mn-F and Mn-E, respectively), (2) gravitational force, and (3) ground reaction force, whose moment (MGR) is applied during the “stance phase” when the limb moves counterclockwise (i.e., with angular velocity q̇ > 0). Muscle afferents provide the length-dependent (type Ia from both muscles and type II from the flexor) and force-dependent (Ib from the extensor) feedback to the CPG through additional excitation to the homonymous (F or E) interneurons of the CPG. This afferent feedback affects motoneuron activity through the CPG by controlling the timing of phase transitions at the RG level and the excitability of the PF circuits. Sensory feedback from the extensor muscle also accesses an additional circuit (In and Inab-E) providing disynaptic excitation of Mn-E during extension.40,41 Biomechanical model of single-joint limb The biomechanical model of a single-joint limb consists of a rigid segment of mass m and length ls connected to a stationary rigid base by a hinge joint (see Fig. 1). The segment oscillates in the sagittal plane by rotating around the suspension point under control of two muscles, flexor (F) and extensor (E). The muscles are attached to the segment and the stationary base. Motion of the segment is described by a second order differential equation: (1) where q is the generalized coordinate (joint angle); I is the moment of inertia of the segment with respect to the suspension point ( ); b is the angular viscosity in the hinge joint; FF is the flexor muscle force; FE is the extensor muscle force; hF is the flexor muscle moment arm; and hE is the extensor muscle moment arm. The generalized force on the right side of equation (1) consists of moment of gravitational force, moment of friction force in hinge joint, moments of muscle forces, and moment of external forces (MGR) emulating the effect of ground reaction forces during “stance.” Contracting the flexor muscle produces negative moment while contracting the extensor muscle produces positive moment applied Markin et al. Page 3 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript to the segment. The following parameters were used in our simulations: m = 300 g; ls = 300 mm; b = 0.002 g · mm2/(ms · rad). Length of muscles (L) is calculated as the distance from origin to attachment point, and the moment arm (h) is calculated as the shortest distance from the muscle to the joint. For the flexor muscle: (2) where a1 is the distance between suspension point and muscle origin, (a1 = 60 mm) and a2 is the distance between suspension point and muscle attachment to the segment (a2 = 7 mm). For the extensor muscle, the same description (2) was used by substituting q with π–q. Muscle velocities are defined as: (3) where q̇ is the segment angular velocity and h is the moment arm of the corresponding muscle. Calculation of muscle forces is based on the Hill-type model proposed by Harischandra and Ekeberg.42 The total force F in each muscle (FF and FE) is defined by the normalized length- (Fl) and velocity- (Fv) dependent variables describing the muscle contractile component and the passive parallel component Fp as follows: (4) where f (V) is the neural activation (output activity of the corresponding motoneuron, Mn-F or Mn-E, respectively, see Fig. 1 and neuron description below; 0 ≤ f (V) < 1) and Fmax is the maximal isometric force of the corresponding muscle (Fmax for the flexor and extensor muscles was set to 72.5 and 37.7 N, respectively). Muscle lengths (L) are normalized with respect to Lopt (the length of muscle for which Fl = 1; Lopt = 68 mm for both muscles); the normalized muscle lengths l = L/Lopt. The force–length dependence Fl in (4) is given by: (5) with parameters β = 2.3, ω = 1.26, and ρ = 1.62.42 The force–velocity dependence Fv in (4) is calculated as: Markin et al. Page 4 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript (6) where υ is muscle velocity; c1 = 0.17, b1 = −0.69, c2(l) = −5.34·l2 + 8.41·l − 4.7, and b2 = 0.18. Negative velocities correspond to shortening of the muscles. The passive force Fp in (4) is calculated as follows42: (7) To simulate the effect of the ground, we assumed that increasing segment angle q (in counterclockwise direction of movement in Fig. 1) corresponds to the stance phase, and decreasing q (in clockwise direction) corresponds to the flexion phase. The moment of ground reaction forces is described as: (8) where MGRmax > 0 is a constant (MGRmax = 585 N · mm). Activity of muscle afferents Only length-dependent feedback from the flexor muscle (primary Ia-F and secondary II-F) and primary length- and force-dependent afferents from the extensor muscle (Ia-E and Ib-E) have been considered (see Fig. 1). The descriptions of muscle afferent activities are derived and modified from the formulas suggested by Prochazka43,44: (9) where υnorm is the normalized muscle velocity (υnorm = υ/Lth); pv = 0.6; dnorm is the normalized muscle lengthening (dnorm = (L −Lth)/Lth, if L ≥ Lth, and 0 otherwise); Lth is the minimal muscle length evoking afferent activation; f (V) is the output activity of the corresponding (flexor or extensor) motoneuron; constI and constII are constant components; Fnorm is the normalized muscle force (Fnorm = (F − Fth)/ Fmax, if F ≥ Fth, and 0 otherwise); kv, kdI, knI , kF , kdII , and knII are coefficients (Lth = 59 mm; Fth = 3.38 N; kv = 6.2; kdI = 2; kdII = 1.5; knI = knII = 0.06; kF = 1). Markin et al. Page 5 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Modeling neurons and the CPG The CPG model is a simplified version of a previous model6,7 and includes a half-center rhythm generator that receives tonic supraspinal drive and generates the locomotor rhythm producing alternating activation of flexor and extensor motoneurons. Because our major focus was on the afferent control of the CPG, the classical reflex circuits and low-level interactions involving Ia interneurons and Renshaw cells have not been included in the model. We however incorporated circuits simulating disynaptic excitation of extensors by group I extensor afferents (In and Inab-E interneurons in Fig. 1, see details in Rybak et al.7). Each neuron in the model represents a neural population and is described by an activity- based neuron model, in which the dependent variable V represents the average membrane voltage of neurons within the population, and the output activity f (V) represents the average or integrated population activity. At the same time, the neuron model was formulated to include an explicit representation of some voltage-gated ionic currents such as potassium rectifier (IK) and persistent sodium (INaP) currents. These currents in RG-F and RG-E neurons in combination with reciprocal inhibition between these neurons define the rhythm- generation mechanism in RG.6,45 Specifically, the membrane potential of CPG neurons (RG-F, RG-E, PF-F, and PF-E) and motoneurons (Mn-F and Mn-E) is described by the following differential equation: (10) The membrane potential of all other neurons (InE, In-F, Inab-E, and In) is described as follows: (11) In the above equations, C is the neuronal capacitance, ILeak is the leakage current, ISynE and ISynI are the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic currents, respectively. The ionic currents are described as follows: (12) Markin et al. Page 6 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript where ḡNaP , ḡK , ḡLeak, ḡSynE, and ḡSynI are the maximal conductances of the corresponding ionic channels; ENa, EK , ELeak, and ESynI are the corresponding reversal potentials; aji defines the weight of the excitatory synaptic input from neuron j to neuron i; bji defines the weight of the inhibitory input from neuron j to neuron i; cmi defines the weight of the excitatory drive dm to neuron i; wki defines the synaptic weight of afferent feedback fbk to neuron i (see Fig. 1). The nonlinear function f (V) defines the output activity of each neuron: (13) where V 1/2 is the half-activation voltage, k defines the slope of the output function and Vth is the threshold for each neuron. Activation of the potassium rectifier and persistent sodium currents is considered instantaneous. V oltage dependent activation and inactivation variables and time constants for the potassium rectifier and persistent sodium channels are described as follows6: (14) The following values of neuronal parameters were used: C = 20 pF; ENa = 55 mV , EK = −80 mV , ESynE = −10 mV, ESynI = −70 mV , ELeak = −64 mV for RG and PF neurons and motoneurons and −60 mV for all other neurons; ḡK = 4.5 nS, ḡLeak = 1.60 nS, ḡSynE = ḡSynI = 10.0 nS, ḡNaP = 3.5 nS for RG neurons, 0.5 nS for PF neurons, and 0.3 nS for motoneurons; τhNaP max = 600 mS. Parameters of f (V) function were V 1/2 = –30 mV , Vth = −50 mV , and k = 3 mV for motoneurons and 8 mV for other neurons. The weights of the synaptic connections are shown in Table 1. To change the rate of oscillations (locomotion speed) in the model, we change the supraspinal drive (d1) in the range of 0.7−3.6. The values of afferent feedback connections in Table 1 correspond to “intact case.” To simulate the loss of supraspinal drive after spinal cord injury, we set d1 = 0. To simulate the effects of training on locomotor recovery, the weights of all length- dependent afferent connections (Ia-F, II-F, and Ia-E) to all target neurons were increased by 31%, and the weights from Ib-E to all target neurons were increased five-fold, which “recovered” stable locomotor oscillations in the absence of a supraspinal drive. The model was implemented using Matlab 7.5.0. Differential equations were solved using a variable order multistep differential equation solver ode15s available in Matlab. Markin et al. Page 7 Ann N Y Acad Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 24. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Results and discussion Model performance under normal conditions Generation of the locomotor rhythm in the model is performed by the half-center rhythm generator comprised of RG-F and RG-E neurons reciprocally inhibiting each other via In-F and In-E inhibitory interneurons, respectively (see Fig. 1). The generation of this rhythm relies on the dynamics of the persistent sodium current (INaP) in RG-F and RG-F neurons and the mutual inhibition between them.6,45 The generation of this rhythm in the “intact” case requires tonic (“supraspinal”) drive to the CPG (see Fig. 1) but does not require afferent feedback. The afferent feedback, however, controls the performance of the CPG and modifies the locomotor pattern generated, adjusting the latter to the behavior of the controlled biomechanical system. Changes in the major characteristics of the biomechanical system during locomotion are shown in Figure 2A. The two top traces in this figure show alternating activity of motoneurons Mn-F and Mn-E, which activate flexor (F) and extensor (E) muscles, respectively. The next four traces represent the corresponding changes in forces and lengths of F and E muscles. The next trace represents changes in the (“hip”) angle (q), and the bottom trace shows changes in the moment of ground reaction forces (MGR) acting during the “stance” phase (when q̇ > 0). Figure 2B represents the activity of RG neurons (RG-F and RG-E) and corresponding inhibitory interneurons (four top traces) and the activity of all four muscle afferents controlling the RG in the model (see Fig. 1). One important feature of the locomotor oscillations in the model is the existence of a delay (about 100 ms, which slightly changes with the rate of oscillations) between the onsets of flexion (FL) and extension (EXT) (defined by the onset of the corresponding RG neurons and motoneurons) and the onsets of the stance (STANCE) and swing (SWING) phases (defined by the “interaction with the ground,” see MGR trace in Fig. 2A). This simulation result exactly reproduces the delay between the onsets of EMG bursts in flexor and extensor muscles and the corresponding onsets of the swing and stance phases (defined by the timing of limb’s touch- down and lift-off) observed during real locomotion.4,5,15,34,37 The locomotor oscillations produced by the model can be represented by a limit cy