Contribution of Sensory Feedback to the Generation of Extensor Activity During Walking in the Decerebrate Cat GORDON W. HIEBERT AND KEIR G. PEARSON Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7, Canada Hiebert, Gordon W. and Keir G. Pearson. Contribution of sensory feedback to the generation of extensor activity during walking in the decerebrate cat. J. Neurophysiol. 81: 758 –770, 1999. In this investi- gation we have estimated the afferent contribution to the generation of activity in the knee and ankle extensor muscles during walking in decerebrate cats by loading and unloading extensor muscles, and by unilateral deafferentation of a hind leg. The total contribution of afferent feedback to extensor burst generation was estimated by allowing one hind leg to step into a hole in the treadmill belt on which the animal was walking. In the absence of ground support the level of activity in knee and ankle extensor muscles was reduced to ;70% of normal. Activity in the ankle extensors could be restored during the “foot-in-hole” trials by selectively resisting extension at the ankle. Thus feedback from proprioceptors in the ankle extensor muscles probably makes a large contribution to burst generation in these muscles during weight-bearing steps. Similarly, feedback from pro- prioceptors in knee extensor appears to contribute substantially to the activation of knee extensor muscles because unloading and loading these muscles, by lifting and dropping the hindquarters, strongly reduced and increased, respectively, the level of activity in the knee extensors. This conclusion was supported by the ﬁnding that partial deafferentation of one hind leg by transection of the L 4–L6 dorsal roots reduced the level of activity in the knee extensors by ;50%, but did not noticeably inﬂuence the activity in ankle extensor muscles. However, extending the deafferentation to include the L 7–S2 dorsal roots decreased the ankle extensor activity. We conclude that afferent feedback contributes to more than one-half of the input to knee and ankle extensor motoneurons during the stance phase of walking in decerebrate cats. The continuous contribution of afferent feedback to the generation of extensor activity could function to automatically adjust the intensity of activity to meet external demands. INTRODUCTION The function of peripheral afferents, in particular those arising from muscle receptors, has been an important issue in the physiology of locomotion since the early work of Sher- rington (1910). In recent years, a primary focus has been on the role of afferent feedback in controlling the timing of the transition from stance to swing. There is evidence that activa- tion of large muscle afferents, arising from muscle spindles and tendon organs in extensor muscles, is capable of regulating the duration of extensor activity associated with stance (Conway et al. 1987; Guertin et al. 1995; Hiebert et al. 1995; Whelan et al. 1995). Also, proprioceptive input from the muscle spindle afferents generated by the stretch of ﬂexor muscles as the limb is extended during stance has been shown to bring about an early transition from stance to swing (Hiebert et al. 1996). These observations indicate that afferent feedback from muscle receptors signaling loading of the leg and extension of the leg are both involved in controlling the timing of the phase tran- sitions. Another possible role of afferent feedback is in the genera- tion of the electromyographic (EMG) activity within a single phase of the locomotion cycle. The idea that monosynaptic excitatory feedback from muscle spindle afferents may con- tribute to muscle activity during stance arose when Severin et al. (1967) observed increased spindle activity during stance in treadmill walking decerebrate cats. Severin (1970) later pro- vided evidence that afferent feedback produced by gamma activation of muscle spindles may contribute nearly 50% of the activity in ankle extensor muscles. A more recent study by Yang et al. (1991) also concluded that velocity-sensitive affer- ents reﬂexively contribute 30 – 60% of the activity in the soleus muscle during early stance in walking humans. Other studies in humans have shown that muscle spindles are involved in the generation of EMG activity during voluntary contractions. Blockade of fusimotor drive acts to decrease the number of motoneurons recruited (Hagbarth et al. 1986) and reduce their ﬁring rates by one-third (Maceﬁeld et al. 1993) during maximal voluntary contractions. Another group of afferents that may contribute to the gen- eration of stance activity is the group Ib afferents arising from Golgi tendon organs in extensor muscles. Originally, extensor group Ib afferents were demonstrated to produce a disynaptic inhibition of homonymous and synergistic motoneurons (La- porte and Lloyd 1952) and were therefore not considered to contribute to the excitation of motoneurons. However, over the past 15 yr, evidence has accumulated that the disynaptic group Ib inhibition is weakened during locomotion and replaced by excitation. Conway et al. (1987) showed that activation of extensor group I afferents during ﬁctive locomotion in spinal cats enhances the amplitude of extensor activity, and if stim- ulated during ﬂexor activity, resets the locomotor rhythm to extensor activity. This effect was attributed to the group Ib afferents in that a similar response could not be generated by selective activation of the Ia afferents by vibration of the muscle. The idea that the Ib inhibitory input observed in a passive, nonlocomoting state switches to excitation during an active, locomoting state has now been conclusively demon- strated (Gossard et al. 1994; Pearson and Collins 1993). In addition, in decerebrate animals feedback from group Ia mus- cle spindles has recently been shown to inﬂuence extensor activity through locomotor-dependent disynaptic and polysyn- aptic pathways (Guertin et al. 1995; McCrea et al. 1995). This has given rise to the possibility that during locomotion the The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “ advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. 758 0022-3077/99 $5.00 Copyright © 1999 The American Physiological Society Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. group Ia and Ib afferents from extensor muscles converge onto common sets of interneurons that produce depolarization of synergistic motoneurons (see Fig. 8 in McCrea et al. 1995). Although it is clear that muscle afferent feedback can inﬂu- ence the level of activity of extensor motoneurons during locomotor activity in cats, either via the group Ia monosynaptic reﬂex or the locomotion-dependent group I polysynaptic path- ways (Gossard et al. 1994; McCrea et al. 1995), there are still a number of unresolved issues. One is the degree to which afferent feedback contributes to the generation of activity in different ankle and knee extensor muscles. The earlier study of Severin (1970) only estimated the contribution of group Ia afferents in the generation of activity in one ankle extensor muscle (lateral gastrocnemius). Another issue is the extent to which the magnitude of EMG activity in different muscle groups is regulated independently by afferent feedback during stance. In particular, we wish to know the extent to which feedback from a speciﬁc set of afferents inﬂuences the activity in one set of extensor muscles (e.g., knee extensors) without inﬂuencing activity in another set of extensor muscles (e.g., ankle extensors). Evidence suggesting some restriction of the inﬂuence of different muscle afferents on activity in different extensor motoneurons is that electrical stimulation of group I afferents from knee and ankle extensor muscles produces dif- ferent effects on extensor motoneurons (Guertin et al. 1995). In this study we addressed these issues by using a variety of procedures to alter afferent feedback and measuring the asso- ciated changes in the magnitude of activity in knee and ankle extensor muscles during walking in decerebrate cats. METHODS Adult cats were anesthetized with halothane and the trachea can- nulated for continued administration of the anesthetic. One of the carotid arteries was ligated, and a cannula to monitor the blood pressure was placed in the other. A cannula was inserted in one jugular vein for the administration of ﬂuids and drugs. Bipolar EMG electrodes were sutured into various ﬂexor and extensor muscles of the hind legs: lateral gastrocnemius (LG), medial gastrocnemius (MG), soleus (SOL), vastus lateralis (VL), vastus medialis (VM), iliopsoas (IP), semitendinosus (ST), and/or tibialis anterior (TA). In some animals an E-shaped force-buckle (see Prochazka 1984) was placed on either the Achilles or the patellar tendon of the left hind leg, depending on the experiment. Before decerebration, the animal was prepared for one of the four experimental paradigms described below. Decerebration was per- formed by transecting the brain stem at a 50° angle from the anterior edge of the superior colliculus, leaving the mammillary bodies intact. After the decerebration the anesthetic was discontinued, and within 1 h spontaneous locomotion activity usually occurred. If no sponta- neous walking occurred, stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotion region (MLR) was used to induce locomotion (15 Hz, 0.6 ms duration, 30 –100 mA; coordinates P2, L4, H6) (Shik et al. 1966). No consistent differences were observed in the responses of animals walking spon- taneously and in animals walking in response to MLR stimulation. All procedures were carried out with approval from the University of Alberta Health Sciences Animal Welfare Committee. Extensor activity during the absence of ground support The ﬁrst procedure we used to assess the contribution of afferent feedback to the generation of extensor activity was to examine the magnitude of activity in extensor muscles in the absence of ground support. This was achieved by allowing a leg to step into a hole in a motorized treadmill belt (0.2– 0.3 m/s) on which the animal was stepping. We have previously used this paradigm to assess the role of afferent feedback on the timing of locomotor activity in spinal and decerebrate cats (Hiebert et al. 1994, 1995). In ;85% of the trials, when the foot entered the hole, it was rapidly withdrawn. This rapid withdrawal was associated with termination of extensor activity and a rapid onset of ﬂexor burst activity (Hiebert et al. 1995). In the remaining 15% of the trials, the leg was held extended in the hole for a longer period, usually being withdrawn following the completion of one step cycle of the contralateral leg (the animal’s weight was supported during these trials either by a sling under the abdomen or by holding the tail). Data from these trials were not included in Hiebert et al. (1995). In the present study, we chose to examine only those trials in which the leg was held extended in the hole. The relatively long delay before the onset of ﬂexor activity allowed an easier assessment of the reduction in the level of activity in extensor muscles because activity could be averaged over a period of 500 ms (see Figs. 1 and 2). There are no indications that the effect on the level of extensor activity during these trials was substantially different from the immediate effect during the trials when the foot was withdrawn FIG. 1. Absence of ground support reduces the level of electromyographic (EMG) activity in ankle and knee extensor muscles in a decerebrate cat walking on a treadmill. The unexpected loss of ground support occurred when the left leg stepped into a hole in the treadmill belt ( top). The records show rectiﬁed and ﬁltered EMGs from 2 different animals during an encounter with the hole. The lateral gastrocnemius (LG), vastus medialis (VM), and semiten- dinosus (ST) muscles were recorded in the 1st animal (top 3 traces) and medial gastrocnemius (MG) and iliopsoas (IP) in the 2nd animal ( bottom 2 traces ). The dashed vertical line indicates the time the foot entered the hole, and the horizontal bar shows the period that the limb was held in the hole. Note the large reduction in the magnitude of EMG activity in the extensor muscles (LG and VM in the 1st example, MG in the 2nd) while the limb was in the hole. 759AFFERENT CONTRIBUTION TO EMG ACTIVITY Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. rapidly. Records in previous publications (Fig. 3A in Hiebert et al. 1995, and D in Hiebert et al. 1994) show marked reductions in the level of extensor activity before the onset of ﬂexor activity during rapid withdrawal trials in decerebrate and spinal animals. Feedback from ankle extensor muscles In eight animals the force generated by the ankle extensors was controlled when the animal encountered the hole in the treadmill belt (Fig. 3). A wire was attached to a clamp secured to the dorsum of the foot (the superﬁcial and deep peroneal and the distal tibial nerves were cut to denervate the foot). The wire passed through a guide that was attached to the tibia by a bolt inserted through the bone. The other end was attached to a DC servo motor. A sheath inside of which the wire could freely move maintained the distance between the tibial attach- ment and the motor. Thus changing the position of the motor resulted in a change of ankle position. Tension in the wire was monitored and compared with a desired level of background force. A force feedback controller automatically adjusted the motor position to maintain the tension in the wire to a speciﬁc value (ranging from 20 g to 1.5 kg). During locomotion the force command to the controller was set to maintain low tension in the wire, thus ensuring that the ﬂexion and extension movements of the ankle joint were not impeded. However, when the foot entered the hole in the treadmill surface, the level of required force in the guide wire was changed to a new level for a set period of time (usually 500 ms), and then returned to the background level. Entry of the foot into the hole was detected by an array of light-emitting diodes located just beneath the treadmill surface (see Hiebert et al. 1994). The signal from the diode array immediately initiated the increase in force command. Loading or unloading of the hindquarters during walking In four animals the L 7–S2 spinal processes were exposed and a length of strong surgical thread passed through the base of each spine. The thread was subsequently attached to a DC motor mounted above the animal. The motor was used to lift or drop the hindquarters after the onset of activity in the MG muscle. Custom-written computer programs were used to recognize the onset of MG EMG bursts. Extensor activity following deafferentation The spinal cord of four animals was exposed by laminectomy of the 4th to 7th lumbar (L4–L7) vertebrae. The dura mater was then cut, and the nerve fascicles of the individual left dorsal roots (L 4–S2) were identiﬁed and loosely grouped together with surgical thread. After recording the EMG activity during decerebrate locomotion with the dorsal roots intact, the dorsal roots on the left side were sequentially transected (beginning at L 4 and ending with S 2), and a segment of walking recorded after each root had been cut. In three of four animals, elastic straps were used to maintain lateral stability of the animal. This procedure was similar to that originally used by Grillner and Zangger (1984) to examine the timing of centrally generated patterns. Data analysis Eight channels of EMG data were recorded on VHS tape using a Vetter 4000A PCM recording unit. A hard copy of the data was subsequently displayed on a Gould ES1000 electrostatic chart re- FIG. 3. Loading ankle extensor muscles during foot-in-hole trials restores normal levels of activity in ankle extensor muscles. A: drawing of the prepa- ration used to control the force generated by the ankle extensor muscles during foot-in-hole trials (see METHODS for details). B and C: rectiﬁed and ﬁltered EMG traces from ankle extensor muscles (SOL and LG) and a hip extensor (IP) with the cable unattached ( B) and when the force in the cable was increased from 25 g to 500 g when the limb entered the hole ( C). Horizontal bar in C indicates the period that the force in the wire was increased. Vertical lines indicate the time the limb entered the hole. FIG. 2. EMG activity in knee and ankle extensors is reduced by ;70% during foot-in-hole trials. A: superimposed averages of rectiﬁed and ﬁltered EMGs recorded from 2 extensor muscles during normal steps ( n 5 12; thin traces) and during foot-in-hole trials (n 5 6; thick traces). Averages were taken from the beginning of the extensor bursts, and the arrows indicate the time the foot entered the hole. The average EMG amplitude for normal and foot-in-hole trials was calculated over a 500-ms period indicated by the interval between the vertical lines. B: scatter plot of the magnitude of EMG activity during foot-in-hole trials as a percentage of the normal EMG activity vs. the cycle period normalized to the average of the 2 preceding step cycles. Each of the EMGs were recorded from 3 separate animals. In the absence of ground support, the EMG activity was signiﬁcantly reduced to ;30% of normal (P , 0.05). This reduction was independent of any change in cycle period. 760 G. W. HIEBERT AND K. G. PEARSON Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. corder. Selected sequences were digitized and stored on disk using the Axotape data acquisition system (Axon Instruments). Custom-written software capable of reading and displaying the Axotape data ﬁles was used to display, store, and analyze averaged EMG data. The average extensor EMG activity during a single step was calculated for a 500-ms period beginning 100 ms after the onset of activity in SOL or ;50 ms after entering the hole (as indicated by the light fence). The initial 100 ms was not included because this period corresponds to the E1 phase of the locomotion step cycle where the limb is not in contact with the ground. The extensor EMG activity during the E1 phase is not dependent on the afferent signals generated by foot contact (Gorassini et al. 1994). The activity during undisturbed walking was taken to be 100% and the level of EMG activity during a perturbation to the stance phase calculated as a percentage of the control. A Student’s t-test (unpaired) was used to calculate signiﬁcant changes from the control. To record kinematic data, surface markers were placed over the iliac crest, greater trochanter, lateral epicondyle of the femur, lateral malleolus and metatarsophalangeal joint and the relative joint angles of the leg monitored with a video recorder (shutter speed 1 ms; 60 frames/s). Triangulation was not used to determine knee joint angles. Stepping sequences were later digitized and saved on computer disk using Video-Blaster software (Creative Labs). Custom-written soft- ware was then used to display the kinematics and plot the joint angles of the limb. The graphics program used to display the plots of joint angles (CorelDraw 5.0) partially smoothed the traces. RESULTS Extensor EMG activity is reduced during the absence of ground support The ﬁrst objective of this investigation was to estimate the total contribution of afferent feedback to the generation of extensor burst activity during walking. We did this by measur- ing the reduction of EMG activity in ankle and knee extensor muscles of one hind leg when the foot unexpectedly entered a hole in the treadmill belt on which the animal was walking. Figure 1 illustrates the EMG activity recorded from two dif- ferent animals during trials when the foot was not rapidly withdrawn from the hole (we will refe