Hip proprioceptors preferentially modulate reﬂexes of the leg in human spinal cord injury Tanya Onushko, 1 Allison Hyngstrom, 2 and Brian D. Schmit 1 1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and 2Department of Physical Therapy, Marquette University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin Submitted 27 March 2012; accepted in ﬁnal form 22 April 2013 Onushko T, Hyngstrom A, Schmit BD. Hip proprioceptors pref- erentially modulate reﬂexes of the leg in human spinal cord injury. J Neurophysiol 110: 297–306, 2013. First published April 24, 2013; doi:10.1152/jn.00261.2012.— Stretch-sensitive afferent feedback from hip muscles has been shown to trigger long-lasting, multijoint reﬂex responses in people with chronic spinal cord injury (SCI). These reﬂexes could have important implications for control of leg move- ments during functional activities, such as walking. Because the control of leg movement relies on reﬂex regulation at all joints of the limb, we sought to determine whether stretch of hip muscles modu- lates reﬂex activity at the knee and ankle and, conversely, whether knee and ankle stretch afferents affect hip-triggered reﬂexes. A custom-built servomotor apparatus was used to stretch the hip muscles in nine chronic SCI subjects by oscillating the legs about the hip joint bilaterally from 10° of extension to 40° ﬂexion. To test whether stretch-related feedback from the knee or ankle would be affected by hip movement, patellar tendon percussions and Achilles tendon vi- bration were delivered when the hip was either extending or ﬂexing. Surface electromyograms (EMGs) and joint torques were recorded from both legs. Patellar tendon percussions and Achilles tendon vibration both elicited reﬂex responses local to the knee or ankle, respectively, and did not inﬂuence reﬂex responses observed at the hip. Rather, the movement direction of the hip modulated the reﬂex responses local to the joint. The patellar tendon reﬂex amplitude was larger when the perturbation was delivered during hip extension compared with hip ﬂexion. The response to Achilles vibration was modulated by hip movement, with an increased tonic component during hip ﬂexion compared with extension. These results demon- strate that hip-mediated sensory signals modulate activity in distal muscles of the leg and appear to play a unique role in modulation of spastic muscle activity throughout the leg in SCI. spinal cord injury; reﬂexes; spasticity IN INDIVIDUALS with spinal cord injury (SCI), stretch-sensitive afferents of the hip ﬂexors produce uncontrolled muscle activ- ity throughout the lower extremities (Schmit and Benz 2002). Clinically, involuntary bilateral leg extension is often seen when SCI patients shift from a sitting to a supine position (Little et al. 1989; Macht and Kuhn 1948), with responses lasting for tens of seconds (Benz et al. 2005). In addition to hip afferent cues, knee (Wu et al. 2005) and ankle (Wu and Schmit 2006) afferents have also been shown to trigger similar mul- tijoint reﬂexes. However, hip extension appears to be an especially important condition to trigger spasms, with knee and ankle afferents only slightly increasing excitation of the mul- tijoint spastic reﬂex responses (Wu et al. 2005; Wu and Schmit 2006). Hip proprioceptive afferents appear to provide the primary sensory signal for modulating reﬂex excitability of the lower extremities in people with SCI. Spastic reﬂex activity in individuals with SCI has been traditionally classiﬁed under the general term of spasticity. Spasticity is often characterized as velocity-dependent, hyper- excitable stretch reﬂexes (Lance 1980). However, spastic re- ﬂexes also manifest as ﬂexor or extensor spasms (Benz et al. 2005) involving more than hyperexcitable reﬂexes from stretch of a single joint. Especially in subjects with SCI, single-joint motion can trigger multijoint responses within the lower ex- tremities, including muscles not being stretched (Onushko and Schmit 2007; Schmit et al. 2000; Schmit and Benz 2002; Steldt and Schmit 2004). Extensor spasms develop more frequently than ﬂexor spasms, with a prevalence of /H1101187% of individuals with chronic SCI (Barolat and Maiman 1987; Little et al. 1989). Extensor spasms can be debilitating to individuals by interfering with transfers and sleep or causing pain (Little et al. 1989; Sjölund 2002). Even though these multijoint reﬂexes have been shown to originate from several afferent cues, the neural mechanisms associated with controlling these reﬂexes are not yet fully understood. Hip-triggered spastic reﬂexes have been loosely associated with neural networks responsible for the regulation of muscle activity during walking. Afferent feedback from changes in hip position operates through spinal reﬂex pathways to regulate muscle activity throughout the leg in a functionally appropriate manner in both human and animal models (Andersson and Grillner 1983; Dietz et al. 2002; Grillner and Rossignol 1978a; Knikou and Rymer 2002). In the decerebrate cat, for example, stretch-sensitive hip afferents are important for initiating limb ﬂexion during the swing phase of gait (Hiebert et al. 1996). Additionally, stretch-related input from the knee and ankle are integrated with hip afferent feedback to properly regulate actions of the limb during stepping. For example, loading and preventing swing of the stepping limb during treadmill walking will prolong the stance phase in the contralateral limb (Yang et al. 1998). After SCI in humans, however, stretching hip ﬂexor muscles can produce inappropriate facilitation of knee exten- sion and ankle plantarﬂexion (Schmit and Benz 2002), both of which can be debilitating during functional movements. Be- cause of their importance in walking and the associated disin- hibition of reﬂexes after SCI, hip proprioceptors might play a unique role in the expression of multijoint reﬂexes in human SCI. Although stretch-related input from the hip triggers multi- joint responses in people with SCI (Onushko and Schmit 2007; Schmit and Benz 2002), it is unclear how hip movement modulates stretch reﬂexes of the ankle and knee. Therefore, the Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: B. D. Schmit, Dept. of Biomedical Engineering, Marquette Univ., PO Box 1881, Milwaukee, WI 53201-1881 (e-mail: brian.schmit@marquette.edu). J Neurophysiol 110: 297–306, 2013. First published April 24, 2013; doi:10.1152/jn.00261.2012. 2970022-3077/13 Copyright © 2013 the American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. purpose of the present study was to investigate the effects of stretch-related sensory inputs from the hips on knee and ankle stretch reﬂexes and, conversely, to identify the effects of knee and ankle stretch feedback on ongoing hip-triggered reﬂexes. Patellar tendon percussion and vibration of the Achilles ten- don, which have been shown to strongly activate primary muscle spindle group Ia afferents (Burke et al. 1976; Roll et al. 1989), were applied at speciﬁc phases of imposed hip oscilla- tions in SCI subjects. Joint torques and electromyograms (EMGs) were compared across conditions. We hypothesized that joint torque and EMG reﬂex amplitude and timing would depend predominantly on hip afferent input in people with SCI. Part of these ﬁndings have been reported in abstract form (Onushko et al. 2011). METHODS Study participants. Nine subjects with chronic SCI (mean /H11006SD age 43.1 /H110069.3 yr; all men) participated in this study. Eight SCI participants were classiﬁed as having incomplete injuries [American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment Scale (AIS) B, C, or D] with a cervical lesion level (Table 1). One subject ( S7) was classiﬁed with a complete injury (AIS A) at thoracic lesion level. This subject’s data were excluded from the group analysis since he did not present with spasms in the lower extremities. At the time of this study, two of the nine subjects were taking antispastic medication (baclofen) to reduce the frequency and intensity of their spasms, and two of the nine subjects were community ambulators ( S2 and S9). The clinical features of each subject are described in Table 1. Additionally, the modiﬁed Ashworth scale [an ordinal scale from 0, no increased tone, to 4, increased tone where passive range of motion is difﬁcult (Bohannon and Smith 1987)] was used to quantify the severity of spasticity (see Table 2). Control data were also collected from eight subjects (mean /H11006SD age 25.6 /H110062.9 yr; 6 men, 2 women) with no reported neurological condition (NI). Exclusion criteria for this study included signiﬁcant medical complications due to skin breakdown, urinary tract infection, other secondary infections, respiratory failure, heterotopic calciﬁcation, or other concurrent illnesses limiting the capacity to conform to study requirements; self-reported, signiﬁcant osteoporosis; or the inability to give informed consent. Informed consent was obtained prior to study participation, and all procedures were conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Marquette University. Experimental setup. Subjects were supine on a therapy plinth with their legs supported in custom-built leg braces. The custom- built leg braces were adjustable to accommodate a wide range of leg lengths. The legs were supported by a strap securing the thigh, a strap securing the heel, and a clamp over the dorsum of the foot to secure the foot to the plate at the end of the leg brace. The knee and ankle joints were held stationary for these tests since extensor spasms can be triggered through stretching of hip musculature (Schmit and Benz 2002). The leg braces were attached to two servomotor drive systems (Kollmorgen, Northhampton, MA) that were used to impose bilateral hip oscillations (Fig. 1 A). Custom- developed LabVIEW programs (National Instruments, Austin, TX) and a data acquisition card (National Instruments) on a PC were used to control the servomotor drive systems. The system was equipped with reaction torque transducers (S. Himmelstein, Hoffman Estates, IL) that aligned with the hip, knee, and ankle anatomical joint axes of rotation for each leg. Hip angle was measured with optical encoders (US Digital, Vancouver, WA) that were afﬁxed to the respective motor shafts. Patellar tendon reﬂexes were elicited with a motorized reﬂex hammer (see Fig. 1 A). The motorized hammer consisted of a LinMot P series linear motor (P01-23x160/70x70) powered by a LinMot E1010 ampliﬁer (LinMot, Delavan, WI). The linear motor was mounted on the leg brace for the right leg. A small rubber tip (12-mm diameter) was screwed into the end of the motor shaft. After the knee was palpated to locate the tendon, the rubber tip was placed /H110115c m from the patellar tendon with an impact angle at /H1101190° to generate /H1101120-N peak force. Additionally, a rubber pad (28 /H1100331 mm) was taped to the subject’s tendon to evenly distribute the force from the motorized reﬂex hammer to the tendon. A custom-written LabVIEW program was used to control the velocity (5-V biphasic square wave) of the linear motor. Displacement of the motor shaft during tendon tap perturbations was measured with a linear variable differential trans- former (LVDT; Accusens Series 2000 DC-EC, Measurement Special- ists, Hampton, VA) coupled to the linear motor shaft. A custom-made vibration system was used to apply 80-Hz vibra- tion to the subject’s Achilles tendon. Vibration at 80 Hz was chosen since it has been shown that this frequency results in a high spindle response rate (Roll et al. 1989). A small DC motor (Faulhaber Minimotor, Schönaich, Germany) was used to rotate two eccentric weights (6 g) that attached to the motor’s shaft (1 weight on each end of the motor) to produce the vibration ( /H1101110-N peak force). The motor and weights were encased within a plastic tube, which was securely strapped onto the subject’s right ankle (Fig. 1 A). A custom-written LabVIEW program was used to send a 5-V step input to control the motor velocity (4,800 rpm). Surface EMGs were collected from six muscles on each leg: rectus femoris (RF), vastus medialis (VM), vastus lateralis (VL), medial hamstrings (MH) (likely including both semimembranosus and sem- itendinosus muscles), medial gastrocnemius (MG), and tibialis ante- rior (TA). Disposable, pregelled Ag/AgCl recording electrodes (Vermed, Bellows Falls, VT) were attached to the muscle belly of Table 1. Subject clinical characteristics Subject Age, yr Injury Level ASIA Score Postinjury Duration, yr Medication(s) S1 32 C 6 D 10 Ditropan XL S2 52 C 4–5 D 8 Baclofen S3 55 C 3 D 3 Baclofen, gabapentin, oxybutinin, duloxetine HCl S4 45 C 5–6 C 28 None S5 33 C 6 C 9 None S6 48 C 6–7 D 23 None S7 43 T 5–6 A 25 None S8 50 C 5 B 30 None S9 30 C 6 D 9 None Neurological injury level: C, /H11005cervical; T, /H11005thoracic. ASIA, American Spinal Cord Injury Association Classiﬁcation. Table 2. Modiﬁed Ashworth scale spasticity scores Subject Hamstrings Quadriceps Gastrocnemius Soleus S1 1/H11001 11 /H11001 1/H11001 S2 na na na na S3 21 3 3 S4 41 2 3 S5 42 3 3 S6 32 2 1 /H11001 S7*1 /H11001 11 1 S8 na na 4 4 S9 22 3 3 Only right leg scores are given. na, Not assessed; * Subject S7 was not able to voluntarily assist the movement of the robot, but for consistency of verbal commands we chose to follow the same protocol with this subject. This subject’s data were excluded from the analyses. 298 HIP PROPRIOCEPTORS MODULATE REFLEXES IN SCI J Neurophysiol • doi:10.1152/jn.00261.2012 • www.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. each muscle in a bipolar arrangement. Prior to electrode placement, the skin was cleaned and lightly abraded with a gauze pad doused with alcohol. EMG signals were ampliﬁed ( /H110031,000) and band-pass ﬁltered (10 –1,000 Hz; Bortec Biomedical, Calgary, AB, Canada) prior to data collection. Experimental protocol. Subjects’ legs were oscillated in an alter- nating manner (i.e., 180° out of phase) over a 50° range of motion (from 40° of hip ﬂexion to 10° hip extension) for 10 continuous cycles at 0.5 Hz. The knee and ankle joints were held stationary within the leg braces (knee: 45° ﬂexion, where 0° corresponds to full knee extension; ankle: 10° plantarﬂexion, where 0° corresponds to the neutral position of the foot). To test the effects of stretch-related sensory feedback from the knee or ankle on hip-triggered reﬂexes, one of two perturbations was applied during different phases of the hip oscillations (see Fig. 1 B): 1) patellar tendon tapping during movement of the right leg into hip extension (tap-ext) or hip ﬂexion (tap-ﬂx) or 2) 80-Hz vibration of the Achilles tendon during movement of the right leg into hip extension (vibe-ext) or hip ﬂexion (vibe-ﬂx). For the tendon tap condition, two tendon perturbations (2 Hz, 25-ms pulse duration) were applied during hip ﬂexion or hip extension. For the vibration condition, Achilles tendon vibration was applied continuously (1 s) during hip ﬂexion or hip extension (see Fig. 1 B). A control condition was also performed in which no perturbation was applied during the hip oscillations. Additionally, subjects were asked to either assist the imposed hip oscillations (assisted) or to remain relaxed during the hip oscillations (passive) to test the effects of remaining descending drive on reﬂex activity. Each condition was presented in a random order and repeated three times with a block design (total of 30 tests). Torque and EMG were recorded throughout the duration of the hip movements. Control subjects performed the same tests. At the end of the experiment, two additional hip oscillation tests were performed to estimate the torque due to gravity, passive joint resistance, and inertial properties of the participant’s legs (for details see Onushko and Schmit 2007). The legs were moved slowly through the 50° range at 2°/s in 5° increments, pausing fo r 5 s between each increment, to measure the combined torque contribution from gravity and passive joint resistance. Then, inertia was estimated from mea- surements during which each leg was quickly oscillated (1.5 Hz) within a midrange of the hip (25° to 10° hip ﬂexion) to minimize the potential for eliciting reﬂexes in SCI subjects during the test. Data analysis. The estimated biomechanical properties of the leg and leg brace were used to correct the measured hip, knee, and ankle joint torque with a method described previously (Onushko and Schmit 2007). Brieﬂy, all recorded torque data were low-pass ﬁltered (8 Hz) with a 2nd-order Butterworth ﬁlter (ﬁltered forward and backward). The torque due to gravity and passive resistance were estimated by ﬁtting a 3rd-order polynomial curve to the torque measurements made during the slow, incremental hip movements. The polynomial coefﬁ- cients were then used to calculate the gravitational and passive resistance torques from the measured data. The inertial properties of the leg and leg brace were calculated by subtracting the gravitational and passive resistance torque and then estimating the inertial constant of the leg and leg brace by linear regression analysis. The mechanical artifact within the system (approximately /H110215 Nm) was estimated with an ensemble average of torque measurements recorded from neuro- logically healthy subjects during passive oscillations. The torque produced by active muscle contraction was calculated by subtracting the gravitational/passive torque, inertial torque, and artifact from the measured trial torque data and was used for all subsequent analyses. The peak torque was used to determine the overall amplitude of the response to the hip oscillations. The peak ﬂexion and extension torques for the hip, knee, and ankle of the right leg were found for each cycle of hip movement. For knee extension torque during trials with patellar tendon taps, the reﬂex torque response from patellar tendon taps was excluded from the peak torque analysis. The mean peak ﬂexion and extension torques for each joint were calculated for each cycle (i.e., 1–9) across subjects. The peak torque at each joint (hip, knee, or ankle) for each subject was normalized to the grand mean of that subject’s torque data across test conditions (e.g., the peak hip torque was normalized to the average peak hip torque for the 10 test conditions /H110033 trials) to make comparisons across subjects. During the progression of the study, the hip and knee joint from subject S3 became misaligned with the torque transducers in the apparatus. This was determined from visual inspection between trials. Torque data from subject S3 were excluded from group analysis. Surface EMG signals from the right leg of SCI subjects were analyzed to obtain the level of muscle activity during the experimental procedures. All surface EMG recordings were band-stop ﬁltered to remove electric power line noise (59 – 61 Hz) and artifact from the 80-Hz vibration (79 – 81 Hz plus harmonics) and band-pass ﬁltered (20 –300 Hz) with 4th-order Butterworth ﬁlters (ﬁltered forward and backward). The root mean square (RMS) of the EMG data was then calculated with a 100-ms moving window. At the end of the hip movements the leg remained in full ﬂexion, providing continuous afferent feedback to spinal neurons from hip extensors. Since we were interested in responses during dynamic hip movements, the last cycle was excluded from analysis. Muscle activation was quantiﬁed by calculating the mean integrated area of the RMS EMG signal for every cycle for which the muscle was active, across all three trials (total average of 27 cycles). During trials with patellar tendon taps, the peak-to-peak (p-p) amplitude, measured as the difference between the largest positive and negative peaks, was calculated with a custom- written MATLAB 