Proprioceptive Control of Extensor Activity during Fictive Scratching and Weight Support Compared to Fictive Locomotion Marie-Claude Perreault, Manuel Enriquez-Denton, and Hans Hultborn Department of Medical Physiology, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark At rest, extensor group I afferents produce oligosynaptic inhi- bition of extensor motoneurons. During locomotor activity, however, such inhibition is replaced by oligosynaptic excitation. Oligosynaptic excitation from extensor group I afferents plays a crucial role in the regulation of extensor activity during walking. In this study we investigate the possibility that this mechanism also regulates extensor muscle activity during other motor tasks. We show that the reﬂex pathways responsible for extensor group I oligosynaptic excitation during ﬁctive locomotion can be activated during both ﬁctive scratching and ﬁctive weight support (tonic motor activity induced by contralateral scratch- ing). These observations suggest that the excitatory group I oligosynaptic reﬂex pathways are open for transmission during several forms of motor activities. We also show that extensor group I input during ﬁctive scratching can affect the amplitude and the timing of extensor activity in a pattern similar to that observed during locomotion. Most likely these effects involve the activation of the excitatory group I oligosynaptic reﬂex pathways. Accordingly, it is suggested that extensor group I oligosynaptic excitation during motor activities other than loco- motion is also used to regulate extensor muscle activity. Fur- thermore, the similarity of effects from extensor group I input on the rhythmicity during scratching and locomotion supports the hypothesis that both rhythms are generated by a common network. Key words: primary muscle spindles; Golgi tendon organs; spinal cord; sensory feedback; rhythm generating networks; motoneuron; motor control In the quiescent cat, activation of extensor group I afferents (which include afferents from both muscle spindle primaries and Golgi tendon organs) induces oligosynaptic reﬂexes in extensor motoneurons that are predominantly inhibitory [autogenic inhi- bition (Granit 1950; Eccles et al., 1957); nonreciprocal group I inhibition (Jankowska 1992)]. However, during locomotion, such inhibition is replaced by oligosynaptic excitation (for review, see Pearson, 1995; Hultborn et al., 1998). There are two oligosynaptic reﬂex pathways that contribute to extensor group I afferent exci- tation of extensor motoneurons; the disynaptic (McCrea et al., 1995; Angel et al., 1996) and the polysynaptic (Gossard et al., 1994) group I pathways. Although afferents from Golgi tendon organs (group Ib) probably provide the dominating input to these pathways (Gossard et al., 1994; McCrea et al., 1995; Angel et al., 1996), there is also a signiﬁcant contribution from primary muscle spindle afferents (group Ia) (McCrea et al., 1995; Angel et al., 1996). The disynaptic and the polysynaptic group I reﬂex pathways represent important sources of excitatory feedback during loco- motion and provide a means by which extensor muscle activity can be generated, reinforced, and prolonged (Conway et al., 1987; Pearson and Collins, 1993; Guertin et al., 1995; Whelan et al., 1995; Whelan and Pearson, 1997; Hiebert and Pearson, 1999). Such excitatory feedback from extensor group I afferents may also be used to control extensor muscle activity during motor tasks other than locomotion. It has been proposed, for instance, that group I excitatory feedback may help to regulate the duration of extensor activity during scratching (Kuhta and Smith, 1990; Carlson-Kuhta and Smith, 1994) and reinforce weight-bearing muscle activity during standing (Pratt, 1995). Although there is evidence supporting the existence of excitatory feedback from extensor group I afferents during nonlocomotor behaviors (Pratt, 1995; Prochazka et al., 1997a,b), it has yet to be shown that the oligosynaptic group I reﬂex pathways described above are involved. In this study, we investigated the ability of ankle extensor group I afferents to evoke oligosynaptic EPSPs in hindlimb extensor motoneurons during ﬁctive scratching (Deliagina et al., 1975, 1981) and “ﬁctive weight support”. In contrast to ﬁctive scratch- ing, ﬁctive weight support is mainly a tonic activity and refers to the tonic activity in contralateral hindlimb extensor muscles dur- ing real scratching (She rrington, 1910). We also examined the effects of extensor group I afferent stimulation on the scratching rhythm. Some of the present results have been presented in abstract form (Perreault et al., 1997). MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation. Data were obtained from 19 cats (1.9 –3.5 kg). After anes- thesia with halothane–nitrous oxide (2–3% halothane, 70% N 2O, and 30% O2), the animals were intubated, and cannulas were inserted in the jugular vein and carotid artery for administration of ﬂuid and drugs and Received June 28, 1999; revised Sept. 27, 1999; accepted Sept. 28, 1999. This work was supported by grants from the Danish Medical Research Council, the Lundbeck Foundation, the NOVO Nordisk Foundation, and the Human Fron- tier Science Program Organization. We thank the following people for their assis- tance: Mrs. Lillian Grøndahl and Conni Temdrup for their help during the exper- iments, Allan Djørup with computers, Kurt Helmer with mechanics, and Egil Gudbrandsen and the late Jan Nielsen with electronics. We would also like to thank Drs. Morten Raastad and Matthew Tresch for their useful comments. Correspondence should be addressed to M.-C. Perreault, Department of Physi- ology, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1103, Blindern, N-0317 Oslo, Norway. E-mail: m.c.perreault@basalmed.uio.no. Dr. Denton’s present address: Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, Division of Neuroscience and Biomedical Systems, West Medical Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, Scotland. Copyright © 1999 Society for Neuroscience 0270-6474/99/1910966-11$05.00/0 The Journal of Neuroscience, December 15, 1999, 19(24):10966–10976 blood pressure monitoring. Atropine (0.1 mg/kg, s.c.) and dexametha- sone (1 mg/kg, i.v.) were given at the beginning of the experiment while buffer solution (10% dextrose and 1.7% NaHCO 3) was infused contin- uously (4.5 ml/hr). The following nerves from the left hindlimb were cut and dissected for recording or stimulation: the ﬂexor nerves sartorius (Sart, with both medial and lateral branches) and tibialis anterior (TA), the extensor nerves semimembranosus and anterior biceps (SmAB), medial gastrocnemius (MG), and/or lateral gastrocnemius plus soleus (GS and/or LGS) and plantaris (Pl) and, the bifunctional nerves poste- rior biceps-semitendinosus (PBSt), quadriceps (Q with the rectus femoris portion), and ﬂexor digitorum and hallucis longus (FDHL). The Q and Sart nerves were placed in cuff electrodes, and the other nerves were mounted on bipolar hook electrodes. From the right limb, GS or Pl and TA or DP (tibialis anterior plus extensor digitorum longus) nerves were mounted. In all experiments, the remaining femoral, sciatic, and obtura- tor nerve branches, and the tendons around the hips, were cut bilaterally. After a laminectomy exposing L4 –S1 spinal cord segments, animals were transferred to a rigid frame, and the head was positioned in a stereotaxic apparatus. Then, a second laminectomy exposing C1–C2 segments and a precollicular-postmammillary decerebration (with all brain tissue rostral to the transection removed) were performed. Decrease of the blood pressure to ,80 mmHg was counteracted by injection of Dextran. An- esthesia was then discontinued, and the animal was paralyzed with pancuronium bromide (Pavulon; 4 mg z kg21 z hr21). The expired CO 2 was maintained between 3.0 and 5.0% by artiﬁcial ventilation. Animal temperature was kept at ;38°C by servo-controlled infrared lamps. The experiments were approved by the National Ethics Committee in Denmark. Fictive motor programs. The motor programs studied include ﬁctive scratching (Fig. 1 A), ﬁctive weight support (Fig. 1 B), and ﬁctive loco- motion. Fictive weight support refers to the tonic activity of extensors seen in the hindlimb opposite to that performing scratching (Sher- rington, 1910). After topical application of D-tubocurarine (0.1– 0.3%) at C1 and C2 dorsal root entry zones (Domer and Feldberg, 1960), ﬁctive scratching and weight support were induced in the left hindlimb by manual stimulation of the left and right pinna, respectively (Fig. 1, diagrams). Fictive locomotion was evoked by stimulation of the mesen- cephalic locomotor region (MLR; 100 –200 mA; 1 msec pulses; 5–20 Hz; Shik et al., 1966). In ﬁve cats, naloxone (100 mg/kg) and clonidine (50 mg/kg) were given to prolong the period over which locomotor activity could be induced (Pearson et al., 1992). Figure 1. Motoneuronal activities during ﬁctive scratching and weight support . Top to bottom, intracellular recording from an SmAB motoneuron ( top trace), ENG recordings from the left hindlimb extensor ( SmAB), ﬂexor ( Sart, TA), and hip extensor/knee ﬂexor ( PBSt) nerves ( middle four traces) and ENG recordings from the right hindlimb extensor ( Pl) and ﬂexor ( DP) nerves ( bottom two traces ). A, Fictive scratching was induced by manual stimulation of the left pinna and monitored with both intracellular recording from an extensor motoneuron in the left spinal cord ( insert) and ENG recordings from left hindlimb nerves. Fictive scratching consisted of two periods: (1) an initial approach period during which extensor motoneuron s (SmAB) were tonically hyperpolarized and hip, knee, and ankle ﬂexor nerves ( Sart, TA) ﬁred tonically, and (2) a rhythmic period during which the bursts of activity in hip ( SmAB, PBSt) and ankle extensors ( MG, LGS; data not shown) alternated with bursts in hip ( Sart) and ankle (TA) ﬂexors. In the right hindlimb, sustained activity was seen in Pl extensor nerve ( arrow). B, Fictive weight support was induced by stimulation of the right pinna so it could be monitored with the same intracellular and left hindlimb ENG recordings as in A. The tonic increase in extensor activity during ﬁctive weight support was generally more pronounced in hip (SmAB and PBSt) than in ankle extensors (data not shown). The intracellular record during ﬁctive weight support shows that sustained depolarization of the extensor motoneuron was accompanied by small, cyclic reductions in membrane potential as rhythmic scratching activity appeared in the right hindlimb extensors. In both panels, the vertical bars below the intracellular waveform indicate single shock stimulation to LGS nerve. Perreault et al. • Excitatory Reﬂexes during Scratching and Weight Support J. Neurosci., December 15, 1999, 19(24):10966–10976 10967 Experimental protocols. Independently of the ﬁctive motor program induced, intracellular recordings were obtained from antidromically identiﬁed extensor motoneurons innervating the left hindlimb (Fig. 1). Glass micropipettes (tip diameter, 1.2–2 mm; resistance, 2– 4 M V) ﬁlled with the lidocaine derivative QX-314 in potassium acetate (2 M) were used. QX-314 blocks sodium spikes and may, in addition, reduce calcium currents [Talbot and Sayer (1996) in hippocampal neurons and Heckman and Lee (1998) in spinal motoneurons]. Thus, QX-314 limits the extent to which sodium and calcium currents could affect postsynaptic potentials. Postsynaptic potentials were evoked by free-running (3–5 Hz) stimu- lation of ankle extensor nerves (1–3 pulses at 100 –300 Hz). The strength of the peripheral nerve stimulation was expressed as multiple of the threshold (T) for the most excitable afferent ﬁbers to evoke cord dorsum potential (CDP) at the L4 or L7 segment. The central latencies of the PSPs were measured from the arrival of the earliest component of the cord dorsum group I afferent volley (Fig. 2). The effects of group I input on the ﬁctive scratching rhythm were investigated using short (relative to the duration of the extension or ﬂexion phase) trains of stimuli (10 –25 pulses at 100 –300 Hz) to ankle extensor nerves. These trains were triggered from the onset of activity in one of the ﬂexor (see Fig. 6) or extensor (see Fig. 7) nerves. In some experiments, the stimulation was delivered continuously throughout many cycles (see Fig. 5). Analysis. Integrated and rectiﬁed electroneurograms (ENGs), stimulus markers (from the MLR and the peripheral nerve stimulation), AC (cord dorsum potentials and intracellular records)-, and DC-coupled record- ings (intracellular records) were digitized at a rate of 500 Hz, 2, 10, and 5 kHz, respectively. All data were collected and analyzed on a Concur- rent 5450 or a personal computer (PC) with software developed by the Winnipeg Spinal Cord Research Center to run under real time Unix (Concurrent) or QNX (PC). The PSPs evoked by peripheral nerve stimulation were averaged be- fore (control) and during each of the ﬁctive motor programs. During ﬁctive scratching and locomotion, the responses occu rring during the ﬂexion or the extension phases were averaged separately. From these averages we excluded the responses evoked during the transition between the two phases. During the initial postural period of scratching (Fig. 1 A, approach period), the responses were analyzed only if the duration of this period allowed a minimum of seven stimuli. During ﬁctive weight support, the responses were analyzed after the initial membrane poten- tial depolarization had reached a tonic plateau (Fig. 1 B). The oligosynaptic EPSPs were frequently preceded by monosynaptic group Ia EPSPs (Figs. 2, 3). To reduce the effect of such contamination on the latencies and amplitudes estimates, we isolated the oligosynaptic EPSPs from the monosynaptic EPSP. This was done by subtracting the “contaminating” monosynaptic EPSP. The traces used for subtraction contained monosynaptic but no oligosynaptic EPSPs (control traces for example). Before subtraction, this monosynaptic EPSP was scaled to the peak amplitude of the “contaminating” monosynaptic EPSPs. The laten- cies and amplitudes of the oligosynaptic EPSPs were usually measured from the trace remaining after subtracting the trace in the absence of motor activity (control) (Figs. 2 C,3 A–C, “difference” trace). However, because disynaptic EPSPs appeared only during the extension phase of ﬁctive locomotion and scratching, disynaptic EPSPs during extension phase were isolated by subtracting the trace during ﬂexion (Fig. 2 A,B). The statistics for the latencies and amplitudes are given as mean 6 SEM, and statistical tests for differences between the means were done by one-way ANOVA using the Dunnett method for multiple comparisons against a single control group ( a , 0.05; Glantz, 1981). The statistics included only group I EPSPs of amplitudes .200 mV in response to single shock stimulation. To analyze the effects of train stimulation on the timing of nerve activity during scratching, we measured (1) the duration of each ENG burst and each cycle (time between the onset of two consecutive ENG bursts) and (2) plotted these values against time (see Figs. 5 C–E,6 C, 7C,D). For the effects on the amplitude of the nerve activity, ENG bursts were averaged and aligned on the onset of the train of stimuli (see Figs. 6 B,7 B) or, in the case of continuous stimulation (see Fig. 5 B), on the onset of the SmAB activity. Figure 2. Ankle extensor group I afferents evoke disynaptic EPSPs not only during ﬁctive locomotion but also during ﬁctive scratching and weight support. The top two traces in A–C are averaged intracellular recordings from an MG motoneuron, showing the group I disynaptic excitatory response (hatched areas) evoked by MG nerve stimulation during ﬁctive locomotion, scratching, and weight support. During locomotion ( A) and scratching ( B), the superimposed traces are the averages during extension ( solid trace) and ﬂexion (dotted trace). In C, superimposed traces are from the averages during weight support (solid trace) and at rest ( dotted trace). In all panels, the middle trace is the arithmetic difference between the top two traces. The bottom trace is the cord dorsum potential record of the arrival of the afferent volley ( vertical dashed line). Number of trials used in the calculation of the averages and the value of the membrane potential are indicated. 10968 J. Neurosci., December 15, 1999, 19(24):10966–10976 Perreault et al. • Excitatory Reﬂexes during Scratching and Weight Support RESULTS Motor pattern characteristics of ﬁctive scratching and weight support Figure 1 shows the nerve activities induced in hindlimbs by manual stimulation of the left ( A) and the right ( B) pinna. Left pinna stimulation ( diagram) induced ﬁctive scratching in the left hindlimb. Fictive scratching was divided into two main periods (Deliagina et al., 1981); an initial tonic period and a rhythmic period (3.2– 6.0 Hz) with alternating bursts of activity in exten- sors and ﬂexors. The activity during the initial period was similar to that recorded during the hindlimb approach in the intact cat (Kuhta and Smith, 1990) and consisted in a tonic ﬁring in ﬂexor nerves (Fig. 1 A, TA and Sart; for intracellular records, see Berkinblit et al., 1980; Degtyarenko et al., 1998). We also found that during the approach period, extensor motoneurons were tonically hyperpolarized (Fig. 1 A, intracellular record ). Tonic hy- perpolarization of extensors, which was seen in SmAB but also in MG and LGS (data not shown) motoneurons, was sometimes preceded by a short burst of activity (data not shown). Such extensor bursts before the approach period have also been re- corded in intact cats that performed scratching from a standing position (Kuhta and Smith, 1990). As described by She rrington (1910), contralateral hindlimb extensors become tonically active to help cats support their weight during scratching. The sustained ﬁring recorded in the Pl extensor nerve of the right hindlimb during ﬁctive scratching (Fig. 1A; open arrow ) shows that weight support activity can also be recorded in preparations without movement-related feedback. Fictive weight support was induced in the left hindlimb (Fig. 1 B) by manual stimulation of the right pinna (Fig. 1, diagram). As shown by the intracellular record (same SmAB motoneuron as in A), extensor motoneurons were tonically depolarized during ﬁc- tive weight support. In the extensor nerves, tonic ﬁring was usually larger in SmAB and PBSt than in ankle nerves. Before the onset of weight support, bursts of activity of ;300 msec (data not shown) were sometimes seen in the PBSt and in the ﬂexor nerves. These ﬂexor bursts may correspond to the yield of the limb when cats switch from quadrupedal to tripodal stance position to per- form scratching. The intracellular record in Figure 1 B also shows cyclic reductions in membrane potential as scratching rhythmic activity appeared in the opposite hindlimb (see right hindlimb ENGs). These cyclic reductions were always of small amplitude (#2 mV) and never reached .20% of the amplitude of mem- brane potential oscillations seen during ﬁctive scratching. Database for intracellular recordings and observations on monosynaptic EPSPs and nonreciprocal IPSPs The synaptic responses evoked by electrical stimulation (one to three shocks, 2 T) of ankle extensor nerves were examined in all 23 extensor motoneurons (12 experiments) recorded during ﬁc- Figure 3. Modulation of group I polysynaptic EPSPs during ﬁctive locomotion, scratching, and weight support. Averaged intracellular recordings from three different motoneurons (1 MG and 2 LGS) showing polysynaptic group I EPSPs ( hatched areas) evoked by ankle extensor stimulation during ﬁctive locomotion ( A), scratching ( B), and weight support ( C). Note that when the stimulation was applied during the extension phase of either locomotion or scratching, o