Dynamic Sensorimotor Interactions in Locomotion SERGE ROSSIGNOL, RE´ JEAN DUBUC, AND JEAN-PIERRE GOSSARD Centre for Research in Neurological Sciences, CIHR Group in Neurological Sciences, Department of Physiology, Universite´ de Montre´al, Montreal, Canada I. General Introduction 89 II. Sensorimotor Interactions in the Spinal Cord During Locomotion 92 A. Cutaneous afferents 92 B. Muscle afferents 103 C. Other afferents 118 III. Sensorimotor Interactions at Supraspinal Levels 119 A. Overview of the supraspinal control of locomotion 119 B. Modulation of descending inputs 120 C. Dynamic sensorimotor interactions at the supraspinal level 121 IV. Cellular and Network Mechanisms of Sensorimotor Interactions 128 A. Presynaptic inhibition 129 B. Interneuronal activity 135 C. Membrane properties 139 V. Concluding Remarks 140 Rossignol, Serge, Re´jean Dubuc, and Jean-Pierre Gossard. Dynamic Sensorimotor Interactions in Locomotion. Physiol Rev 86: 89 –154, 2006; doi:10.1152/physrev.00028.2005.—Locomotion results from intricate dynamic interac- tions between a central program and feedback mechanisms. The central program relies fundamentally on a genetically determined spinal circuitry (central pattern generator) capable of generating the basic locomotor pattern and on various descending pathways that can trigger, stop, and steer locomotion. The feedback originates from muscles and skin afferents as well as from special senses (vision, audition, vestibular) and dynamically adapts the locomotor pattern to the requirements of the environment. The dynamic interactions are ensured by modulating transmission in locomotor pathways in a state- and phase-dependent manner. For instance, proprioceptive inputs from extensors can, during stance, adjust the timing and amplitude of muscle activities of the limbs to the speed of locomotion but be silenced during the opposite phase of the cycle. Similarly, skin afferents participate predomi- nantly in the correction of limb and foot placement during stance on uneven terrain, but skin stimuli can evoke different types of responses depending on when they occur within the step cycle. Similarly, stimulation of descending pathways may affect the locomotor pattern in only certain phases of the step cycle. Section II reviews dynamic sensorimotor interactions mainly through spinal pathways. Section III describes how similar sensory inputs from the spinal or supraspinal levels can modify locomotion through descending pathways. The sensorimotor interactions occur obviously at several levels of the nervous system. Section IV summarizes presynaptic, interneu- ronal, and motoneuronal mechanisms that are common at these various levels. Together these mechanisms contribute to the continuous dynamic adjustment of sensorimotor interactions, ensuring that the central program and feedback mechanisms are congruous during locomotion. I. GENERAL INTRODUCTION Previous reviews in the ﬁeld of locomotion have mainly covered the mechanisms of spinal central pattern generation (244) and sensory as well as supraspinal con- tributions to the initiation or control of this central pat- tern generation (15, 244, 246, 477, 486). Major reviews (158, 611) and a book (415) published more recently have also dealt with some aspects of sensorimotor interactions during locomotion. The present review attempts to give a broad view of the dynamic sensorimotor interactions dur- ing locomotion from cutaneous and proprioceptive affer- ents coursing through the spinal cord as well as from sensory inputs reaching supraspinal structures through ascending spinal pathways or through special senses (vi- sual, vestibular, auditory) that may interact dynamically with pattern-generating networks through descending pathways. Some of the basic and common mechanisms of Physiol Rev 86: 89 –154, 2006; doi:10.1152/physrev.00028.2005. www.prv.org 890031-9333/06 $18.00 Copyright © 2006 the American Physiological Society Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/physrev (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. dynamic sensorimotor interactions such as afferent excit- ability changes, interneuronal pathway selection, and lo- comotor-related membrane properties of neurons will be discussed in relation to afferent and descending inputs acting on locomotor networks. We have tried to give a balanced view of several concepts that have emerged in recent decades. To achieve this, we report studies in sufﬁcient details with appropriate citations that the read- ers should have the tools to make their own interpretation of the sometimes conﬂicting results, while at the same time we express our own views on some of the apparent conﬂicts. At the onset, it should be stated that removal of all or most sensory afferents by dorsal rhizotomy does not pre- vent the expression of rhythmic patterns such as locomo- tion (223–225, 255, 589). Similarly, after pyridoxine intox- ication, which destroys large-diameter sensory ﬁbers, cats do eventually recover locomotion even though the large afferents have not recovered (430). In humans, the per- manent loss of large sensory ﬁbers below the neck leads to important impairment of walking (reduced joint excur- sion, enlarged base of support), although slow walking, under visual guidance, is still possible (324).Other work has also clearly shown that after paralysis, induced by a chemical neuromuscular blockade, a complex and de- tailed rhythmic pattern can be recorded from muscle nerves (“ﬁctive locomotion”) when decerebrate and spi- nal cats are injected with L-DOPA (254, 433) (see also Fig. 7). These basic ﬁndings led to the proposal of the exis- tence of a central pattern generator (CPG) for locomo- tion, i.e., spinal networks of neurons capable of generat- ing a detailed rhythmic locomotor pattern in the absence of descending or afferent inputs (244). If not needed to generate the basic locomotor pat- tern, what then are the roles of sensory information dur- ing locomotion? Afferent feedback plays a crucial role in adapting and modulating the operation of the CPG in the real environment. Sensory inputs can have global inﬂu- ences in allowing, preventing, or selecting motor patterns. Through dynamic interactions, sensory inputs can partic- ipate in the correct positioning of the feet in uneven terrain or in response to obstacles. They can also modify the frequency of the pattern, its intrinsic structure, or the amplitude of muscle discharges within its component subphases. One immediately realizes the complexity of a situation in which sensory inputs of different modalities must be correctly interpreted while the limbs are contin- uously changing position during walking. There is thus a need for a great ﬂexibility in the motor responses to sensory inputs during locomotor movements (dynamic sensorimotor interactions). The expression “dynamic interactions” is taken here to include various conditions in which afferent inputs and the CPG exert a reciprocal inﬂuence so that both are changed by the activity of one another. More generally, the term dynamic refers to situations in which evoked responses change as a function of state (or task) or as a function of the phases of the task. Generally, state-depen- dent modulation refers to a modulation of reﬂex re- sponses occurring during a “locomotor state” relative to a “resting state.” Task-related modulation, on the other hand, refers to different locomotor tasks (walking, run- ning, walking backward or forward). State- or task-depen- dent interactions could result in a change of response characteristics (inhibitory to excitatory or vice versa) at transition from rest to locomotion (state) or from forward to backward locomotion (task), or from standing to walk- ing or running (tasks). For instance, an inhibitory re- sponse in one state or task may become excitatory in another state or vice versa. Responses that vary system- atically as a function of the various phases or subphases of cyclical movements are referred to as phase-dependent responses. Thus an excitatory response in some muscles in one phase can be absent in the opposite phase, or become inhibitory or excitatory to another set of muscles. A less obvious type of dynamic sensorimotor interaction is observed when an afferent input is maintained tonically (for instance, a tonic ﬂexion of a joint or a continuous pinch of the skin) or when afferent inputs are removed, as in the case of a chronic neurectomy or nerve block with a local anesthetic. In these conditions, the tonic input is the same throughout all phases of locomotion, but since locomotion continues, the tonic input dynamically inter- acts with each subphase of the centrally generated cycle. These dynamic interactions may also evolve with time, for instance, in cases of permanent neurectomy, in which condition sensorimotor motor interactions must undergo some plastic changes. Mechanisms and sites of dynamic interactions are numerous, and Figure 1 points to some of the possibili- ties. Afferent inputs from muscles or the skin reach the spinal cord, project to motoneurons directly or through interneurons (inﬂuenced by the CPG), or through the CPG itself. Afferents also send collaterals through ascending pathways (directly or via relay interneurons) reaching supraspinal structures (telencephalon, brain stem), which in turn project down to the spinal cord on neurons that may or may not also be contacted by the same primary afferent. Through various mechanisms for selecting mo- tor patterns (locomotion, scratching, fast paw shake), sets of membrane properties (i.e., locomotor drive poten- tial, plateau potentials) are activated. In Figure 1, these mechanisms are only shown for motoneurons in the spi- nal cord and for one idealized cell in supraspinal struc- tures. For instance, at the brain stem level of the lamprey, sensory inputs of graded strength evoke graded potentials in the reticulospinal cells leading, eventually, to a sus- tained plateau potential and cell discharges and to the initiation of swimming. There is thus a dynamic transfor- mation of a sensory signal into a motor command, and 90 SERGE ROSSIGNOL, RE´ JEAN DUBUC, AND JEAN-PIERRE GOSSARD Physiol Rev  VOL 86  JANUARY 2006  www.prv.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/physrev (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. this relies on intrinsic membrane properties of brain stem neurons. At the spinal cord level, sets of interneurons will be selected (interneuronal selection) to allow or block transmission during a given task or else control the trans- mission in a phase-dependent manner. Finally, through presynaptic inhibition that may occur at different sites (see yellow areas for selected examples), the efﬁcacy of transmission in different tasks and phases of the task may be regulated. It is fascinating to think that probably all these regulatory mechanisms giving rise to a vast reper- toire of purposeful dynamic sensorimotor interactions are at play simultaneously during locomotion. The study of dynamic sensorimotor interactions dur- ing locomotion is of interest not only to determine how various reﬂex responses may give rise to coherent correc- tions of locomotion to perturbations, but it may also reveal basic mechanisms of sensorimotor integration dur- ing movement. First, it is more than likely that the dy- namic regulation of responses to unexpected perturba- tions also applies to the regulation of the normal step cycle by the same afferents during unperturbed walking. Thus the increased or decreased gain of some reﬂex pathways observed by using perturbations to evaluate such reﬂex gain may also apply when the same afferents are activated by the locomotor movements themselves (re-afference). Second, the planning and execution of movement must include a set of “ready-to-go” corrections in response to perturbations that may interfere with the various parts or phases of the movement. Studying re- ﬂexes during rhythmic processes thus permits the under- standing of many of the processes occurring in the back- ground that are revealed only if unexpected events occur. These “behind-the-scenes” processes may be important in pathological conditions in which they may be absent or reduced. Thus it might well be that after neurotrauma or neurological diseases, the ability to correct planned movements is also impaired as well as the movements themselves (608). Work in patients with polyneuropathy FIG. 1. Some sites for dynamic sen- sorimotor interactions during locomo- tion. Sensory inputs of various modalities reach the spinal cord or the brain stem and are generally subjected to a phasic presynaptic inhibitory control (yellow) at their entry (which can even lead to anti- dromic discharges). Afferent inputs make contact with second-order neurons that are themselves modulated by the rhythmic process such that some path- ways may be opened or closed in differ- ent phases of the cycle or else the same input may give rise to excitatory or inhib- itory responses in the various phases of the cycle (interneuronal selection in pink). This is achieved either by inputs processed by those interneurons impli- cated directly in the pattern generation or through interneurons whose excitabil- ity is modulated cyclically by the central pattern generator (CPG). Interneurons enclosed within the dashed area are con- sidered to be cyclically inﬂuenced by the CPG but are not part of the rhythm gen- eration process itself of the CPG. Mem- brane properties of motoneurons and in- terneurons apparent only during locomo- tion (locomotor drive potentials) can also change the gain of the responses to sensory stimuli. DYNAMIC SENSORIMOTOR INTERACTIONS IN LOCOMOTION 91 Physiol Rev  VOL 86  JANUARY 2006  www.prv.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/physrev (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. affecting mainly A /H9252ﬁbers reveals both abnormalities in gait pattern as well as a great reduction in compensatory adaptive reﬂexes (572). Parkinsonian patients have also been shown to have a reduced proprioception, which might account for part of their characteristic locomotor deﬁcits (133). The plan of the review is as follows. In section II,w e describe, in various animal preparations, and humans when applicable, state- and phase-dependent spinal re- ﬂexes during locomotion in response to various types of sensory inputs (cutaneous and proprioceptive) and indi- cate their potential contributions not only to adapt loco- motion to unexpected perturbations but also to the elab- oration of the normal locomotor pattern. Some pathways and mechanisms are suggested to explain certain types of sensorimotor interactions, but some of these common mechanisms are discussed in more detail in the last part of the review. In section III, we describe dynamic senso- rimotor interactions between supraspinal structures, ac- tivated by sensory inputs either relayed from the spinal cord or by “special senses” pathways reaching supraspi- nal structures directly. These illustrate how such interac- tions, together with spinal interactions, lead to a system of coherent corrective responses that will be integrated with the ongoing locomotion. In section IV, a particular emphasis will be put on presynaptic, interneuronal selec- tion, and motoneuronal mechanisms which may, in isola- tion or in combination, control some of the dynamic sensorimotor interactions during locomotion described in sections III and IV. II. SENSORIMOTOR INTERACTIONS IN THE SPINAL CORD DURING LOCOMOTION This section mainly concentrates on the effects of cutaneous and muscle afferent stimulation in animal preparations, but a number of studies in humans showing similar principles of dynamic sensorimotor interactions are also mentioned. Two fairly recent and extensive re- views have been published on the functional roles of proprioceptive and cutaneous reﬂexes in the animal king- dom, including humans, during locomotion or other tasks (611) and on load receptors (158). A. Cutaneous Afferents The natural activation of cutaneous ﬁbers can be assessed by recording the actual discharges of single cutaneous afferents or whole cutaneous nerves during locomotion. Only a few studies were performed on the activation of single cutaneous ﬁbers during treadmill lo- comotion of intact cats (348, 351). Although most of the units discharged as predicted from the direct activation of their receptive ﬁeld with the external milieu, other units ﬁred probably as a result of movement-related skin stretches. Some of these units discharged two bursts per cycle. Recording of cutaneous nerves with chronically implanted electrodes (266) also showed whole nerve dis- charges in distinct phases of the cycle (449). The newly developed method to record multiple single units with electrode arrays inserted in dorsal root ganglia in walking decerebrate cats (14) should provide a wealth of new data on the discharges of cutaneous units especially in relation to proprioceptive afferent units and clarify their relative importance in signaling sensory inputs during various subphases of the locomotor cycle. For the time being, however, the majority of the work for assessing the role of cutaneous information during locomotion was performed using neurectomies/anesthe- sia or mechanical stimulation of the skin or electrical stimulation of the skin or skin nerves in different parts of the step cycle. 1. Removal of cutaneous inputs Early work of Sherrington (531) showed that remov- ing cutaneous inputs from the hindlimbs did not prevent locomotion even after spinalization. This was largely sup- ported by others who reported little deﬁcits when cutting cutaneous nerves in otherwise intact cats (163) or inﬁl- trating the central foot pad with a local anesthetic (190). Anesthesia of the dorsum of the foot in chronic spinal cat (207) or intact cat (462) does not prevent locomotion. However, unpublished observations (S. Grillner and S. Rossignol, unpublished data) showed that anesthesia of the foot pad in chronic spinal cats interfered with foot placement. Recent work on denervation of the foot pads shed more light on the issue of the contribution of cutaneous inputs to locomotion (48 –51, 481). Five cutaneous nerves innervating the hindfeet were cut and prevented from regenerating by capping their proximal end with a poly- mer cuff. After the denervation, cats with an intact spinal cord could walk almost normally on a treadmill (Fig. 2, A–D). Detailed electromyogram (EMG) and kinematic analyses of treadmill walking showed a long-term adap- tation to the denervation consisting essentially in a faster swing (accompanied by an increase in knee and ankle ﬂexors EMG activity), an increased foot lift, as well as a 5–10% increase in double support. The main deﬁcit, how- ever, occurred during precision walking when cats tried to walk on the rungs of an horizontal ladder. Early after the denervation, cats were unable to place their feet on the rungs, and this lasted for 3–7 wk. Eventually, ladder walking recovered but was never quite normal, with cats tending to grip the rungs of the ladder with a clawlike position of the paws. It is thus reasonable to think that cutaneous sensory inputs normally provide the sensory cues necessary to adjust walking, on a step by step basis, 92 SERGE ROSSIGNOL, RE´ JEAN DUBUC, AND JEAN-PIERRE GOSSARD Physiol Rev  VOL 86  JANUARY 2006  www.prv.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/physrev (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. i.e., dynamically. It is very likely that the kinematic meth- ods used in that study were not precise enough to assess the ﬁne positioning of the foot during ordinary walking on a treadmill or over ground. Increasing the walking difﬁ- culty probably enhanced a subtle deﬁcit undetected dur- ing level treadmill walking. Further evidence for this comes from the observation that walking on a tilted tread- mill was also mildly deﬁcient after denervation, suggest- ing that 