J Comput Neurosci (2015) 38:25–51 DOI 10.1007/s10827-014-0519-3 The significance of dynamical architecture for adaptive responses to mechanical loads during rhythmic behavior Kendrick M. Shaw · David N. Lyttle · Jeffrey P. Gill · Miranda J. Cullins · Jeffrey M. McManus · Hui Lu · Peter J. Thomas · Hillel J. Chiel Received: 6 October 2013 / Revised: 25 June 2014 / Accepted: 22 July 2014 / Published online: 4 September 2014 © Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014 Abstract Many behaviors require reliably generating sequences of motor activity while adapting the activity to Action Editor: J. Rinzel K. M. Shaw (/envelopeback) Department of Biology and Medical Scientist Training Program, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland OH 44106, USA e-mail: kms15@case.edu D. N. Lyttle Departments of Mathematics and Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland OH 44106, USA e-mail: david.lyttle@case.edu J. P . Gill· M. J. Cullins · J. M. McManus · H. Lu Department of Biology, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland OH 44106, USA J. P . Gill e-mail: jpg18@case.edu, M. J. Cullins e-mail: mjc35@case.edu, J. M. McManus e-mail: jmm45@case.edu, H. Lu e-mail: hxl75@case.edu, P. J. Thomas Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland OH 44106, USA e-mail: pjthomas@case.edu H. J. Chiel Departments of Biology, Neurosciences and Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland OH 44106, USA e-mail: hjc@case.edu incoming sensory information. This process has often been conceptually explained as either fully dependent on sensory input (a chain reflex) or fully independent of sensory input (an idealized central pattern generator, or CPG), although the consensus of the field is that most neural pattern gen- erators lie somewhere betw een these two extremes. Many mathematical models of neural pattern generators use limit cycles to generate the sequence of behaviors, but other- models, such as a heteroclinic channel (an attracting chain of saddle points), have been suggested. To explore the range of intermediate behaviors between CPGs and chain reflexes, in this paper we describe a nominal model of swal- lowing in Aplysia californica. Depending upon the value of a single parameter, the model can transition from a generic limit cycle regime to a heteroclinic regime (where the trajec- tory slows as it passes near saddle points). We then study the behavior of the system in these two regimes and compare the behavior of the models with behavior recorded in the animal in vivo and in vitro. We show that while both pattern generators can generate similar behavior, the stable hetero- clinic channel can better respond to changes in sensory input induced by load, and that the response matches the changes seen when a load is added in vivo. We then show that the underlying stable heteroclinic channel architecture exhibits dramatic slowing of activity when sensory and endoge- nous input is reduced, and show that similar slowing with removal of proprioception is seen in vitro. Finally, we show that the distributions of burst lengths seen in vivo are better matched by the distribution expected from a system oper- ating in the heteroclinic regime than that expected from a generic limit cycle. These observations suggest that generic limit cycle models may fail to capture key aspects ofAplysia feeding behavior, and that alte rnative architectures such as heteroclinic channels may provide better descriptions. 26 J Comput Neurosci (2015) 38:25–51 Keywords Aplysia · Heteroclinic channel · Central pattern generator · Chain reflex · Limit cycle 1 Introduction Motor behaviors, such as cat running, crayfish swimming, and dog lapping all require the nervous system to reliably generate a sequence of motor outputs. To be efficient, how- ever, a fixed sequence of activity is not enough: a cat that fails to step over an obstacle may lose its footing and fall (Forssberg et al. 1975; Forssberg 1979) and a crayfish that wanders into a current of cold water must control muscles that may suddenly have become stronger but relax more slowly (Harri and Florey 1977). Sensory feedback plays a key role in allowing an animal to adapt its behavioral pattern to the circumstances in which it finds itself. The way that this sensory information is integrated into pattern genera- tion to produce adaptive behavior, however, can be difficult to ascertain. Historically, two competing theories have been proposed for how the nervous system can generate sequences of motor activity (Marder and Bucher 2001). At one extreme, Loeb (1899) proposed that sensory input is required for the tran- sitions between behaviors, so that the sequence of behavior is formed of a chain of reflexes each leading to the next. He thus proposed calling this form of pattern generation a “ket- tenreflex,” or “chain reflex.” For example, during walking, this theory would predict that extension of the leg contin- ues until sensory input indicates that the foot has struck the ground, and in the absence of this sensory input, the pat- tern would not progress. This theory was later elaborated by Sherrington, who noted that bouts of walking-like move- ments could be evoked in the hind limbs of a dog after spinal transection by dropping the limb, and these motor patterns would stop abruptly when the limb was passively mechanically arrested (Sherrington 1910). Even the strongest proponents of chain reflex theory saw it as an incomplete explanation of what was observed in the biology, however. Sherrington, noting that spinal stimulation could produce step-like movements even in a deafferented limb, conclude d “These difficulties suggest that generation of a secondary local stimulus and its inter- ference with the operation of the primary remote stimulus, although regulative of the rhythm (cf. vagus and respi- ratory rhythm) is of itself not the sole rhythm-producing factor in the reflex.” By the time Wilson showed that the nervous system in the locust could generate strong struc- tured motor patterns in the absence of sensory input (Wilson 1961), investigators had come to assume that sequences of motor activity were primarily generated by a central pattern generator. The central pattern generator theory sug- gests that the nervous system can, on its own, produce appropriate patterns of motor activity even in the absence of sensory input. Within the context of this theory, sen- sory input merely serves to modulate the underlying neural pattern. It should be noted, however, that patterns generated by the isolated nervous system often are very distorted com- pared to those seen in vivo . In particular, components of the motor pattern are often significantly longer than those observed in the intact animal . This observation has led many investigators to question the descriptive power of central pattern generator theory. In the words of Robert- son and Pearson, “Although now abundantly clear that a central rhythm generator can produce powerful oscillations in the activity of flight motor neurons and interneurons [in locusts], it is equally clear that the properties of this central oscillator cannot fully account for the normal flight pattern” (Selverston 1985). There is some evidence that slowing of isolated neural patterns may be due to the absence of sensory feedback and endogenous input. In Pearson et al. ( 1983), cycle-by- cycle stimulation of the appropriate sensory afferents was able to restore wing-beat frequency in fictive flight in the locust. Restoration of the normal pattern by sensory input suggests that biological pattern generators may occupy a middle ground between pure central pattern generators and chain reflexes. In some cases, endogenous neural input may control where a systems lies on this continuum. As B¨assler (1986) noted when considering a relaxation-oscillator like model of a central pattern generator “Hence, one and the same system can behave either like a CPG or like a chain reflex, depending only on the amount of endogenous input.” These investigators thus warned about the dangers of infer- ring the mechanism used by a pattern generator in vivo based only on the behavior of a pattern generator in vitro. Despite these hesitations, the empirical data supporting the central pattern generator hypothesis led to a focus on providing a mathematical formulation for this theory using the qualitative analysis of dynamical systems. The behavior of an ideal central pattern generator naturally corresponds to a system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations whose solutions contain a stable limit cycle (an attracting isolated periodic orbit). As a result, this structure has played a cen- tral role in the mathematical description of central pattern generators (Ijspeert 2008). In contrast, there have been fewer attempts to model chain reflexes with systems of differential equations. Instead, much of the work modeling these types of sensory- dependent systems uses different tools, such as finite state machines (Lewinger et al. 2006). While these models can capture individual phases of the behavior well, they gen- erally do not describe the transitions between the phases, which may be important in understanding some forms of behavior. In contrast, one could view the state of a chain J Comput Neurosci (2015) 38:25–51 27 reflex system in terms of a series of stable fixed points. In each phase of the motion, the trajectory would be captured by one of the fixed points until the appropriate (external) sensory input pushed the system out of the neighborhood attracted to that fixed point and into the basin of attraction of the next. Between these two extremes of models of central pattern generators and chain reflexes, one may consider systems in which the progress of a periodic orbit is slowed, but not stopped, by passage near one or more fixed points. This behavior arises naturally in a structure known as a “sta- ble heteroclinic channel” (Rabinovich et al. 2008), where multiple saddle points (fixed points that attract in some directions while repelling i n others) are connected in a cycle, so that the unstable manifold of each saddle point brings the system near the stable manifold of the next fixed point. This structure has been used to describe motor behav- ior such a predatory swimming behavior in Clione (Levi et al. 2004; Varona et al.2004). To our knowledge, however, these models of pattern generation have not been directly compared to those built with a more “pure” limit cycle that does not pass near fixed points. A potential advantage of a dynamical system that allows trajectories to move close to equilibrium points is that it may spend longer or shorter times in that vicinity, rather than proceeding through the cycle with a relatively con- stant velocity. In turn, this could allow an animal greater flexibility in responding to unexpected changes in the envi- ronment, such as increases or decreases in mechanical load as it attempts to manipulate an object. Other studies have investigated dynamical archit ectures in which oscillatory pattern generators can selectively slow their dynamics in response to sensory input (Zhang and Lewis2013;B¨uschges and Gruhn 2007; Daun-Gruhn and B¨uschges 2011;N a d i m et al. 2011; Rowat and Selverston 1993), which we discuss in Section 6.2.2. To examine these alternative dynamical architectures, we have created a neuromechani cal model based on the feed- ing apparatus of the marine mollusk Aplysia californica . We examine the behavior of the model in two parameter regimes. In the first parameter regime, the neural dynamics are largely insensitive to sensory feedback, and produce out- put similar to an idealized central pattern generator. In this regime, the presence of equilibrium points has only a small effect, and the neural dynamics behave like a limit cycle. In the second parameter regime, proprioceptive feedback can overcome the intrinsic neural dynamics and selectively slow progression through different points of the cycle, thereby producing behavior closer to that of a chain reflex. In this regime, the stable heteroclinic channel structure becomes important, since the presence of the equilibrium points is the key dynamical feature allowing the sensory feedback to selectively slow the dynamics. We then compare the behavior of the two models to the observed behavior of the animal, and show that several of the features of the ani- mal’s behavior are better described by the model in the the more “chain-reflex like” parameter regime. At the end of the paper, we reflect on possible general principles suggested by this work. 2 Mathematical framework In this section we describe a g eneral mathematical frame- work we will use for modeling the behavior of motor pattern generators. We model a central pattern generator receiving sensory input from the body as a system of dif- ferential equations specifying the evolution of a vector of n neural state variables, a ∈ Rn, and a vector of m state variables, x ∈ Rm, representing the mechanics and periph- ery (e.g. muscle activation). We assume that an applied load interacts only with the mechanical state variables, so that the differential equations can be naturally written in the following form: da dt = f( a, μ) + ϵg(a, x), (1) dx dt = h(a, x) + ζl( x). (2) Here μ is a vector of parameters which can encode states such as arousal of the animal, f( a, μ) represents the intrin- sic dynamics of a motor pattern pattern generator, h(a, x) represents the dynamics of the periphery with the given cen- tral input, g(a, x) represents the effects of sensory feedback from the periphery,l(x) represents the effects of an external load or perturbation, and ϵ,ζ ∈ R+ are scaling constants, not necessarily small. We further assume that all of these functions have bounded ranges over the domain of interest. 2.1 Limit cycles We first consider the case of a n idealized central pattern generator, where a part of the nervous system can produce sequences of motor activity that closely resemble those seen in vivo, even when it is not attached to the periphery. Thus we assume that, for some range of the parameter μ,t h e dynamics of the isolated neural circuit, da/dt = f( a, μ), contain an attracting limit cycle χ(t) which represents the observed motor pattern. 2.2 Chain reflex models We next consider the chain reflex. In this case, the dynam- ics of the isolated nervous system, da/dt = f( a, μ), will contain a set of stable nodes, A, where each node 28 J Comput Neurosci (2015) 38:25–51 represents a “stage” of the chain reflex, that can be desta- bilized by sensory input. Note that in this case, unlike the central pattern generator, ϵ may need to be large to destabilize a node. The combined dynamics of the ner- vous system and the periphery, however, would still be expected to contain a stable limit cycle ξ(t) rather than a series of fixed points. Similar dynamics have been seen in models of other biological oscillators; for example in Novak et al. ( 1998) the authors created a model of the cell cycle where fixed points in the biochemical dynam- ics (analogous to the isolated neural dynamics) can be destabilized by changes in cell size (analogous to the periphery) so that the coupled system contains a limit cycle. 2.3 Stable heteroclinic channels We now consider a system that is intermediate between the two extremes of an idealized central pattern generator and a chain reflex. We can construct such a system from as e to f n-dimensional hyperbolic saddle points, each with a one-dimensional unstable manifold and an n − 1 dimen- sional stable manifold, arranged in a cycle such that the unstable manifold of one saddle point intersects the sta- ble manifold of the next, forming a heteroclinic orbit. We refer to these saddle points and their connecting heteroclinic orbits as a heteroclinic cycle (Guckenheimer and Holmes 1988). Under appropriate conditions, this heteroclinic cycle attracts nearby orbits (and thus can be called a stable het- eroclinic cycle). In particular, if we define the (positive) ratio of the least negative stable eigenvalue λi,s and the unstable eigenvalue λi,u of the ith saddle as the saddle index νi =− λi,s/λi,u (Shilnikov et al. 2002), then the heteroclinic cycle will attract nearby orbits if ∏ i νi > 1 (Afraimovich et al. 2004a). This type of dynamics can arise naturally from neural models involving symmetric, mutu- ally inhibitory pools of neurons; for example see (Nowotny and Rabinovich ( 2007), and Komarov et al. ( 2013, 2009). Slow switching along heteroclinic loops can also occur in systems of coupled phase oscillators (Kori and Kuramoto 2001). Conditions for the occurrence of stable heteroclinic channels have been studied in Komarov et al. ( 2010)a n d Ashwin et al. (2011). An unperturbed trajectory on the heteroclinic cycle will, like the chain reflex model in Section 2.2, asymptotically approach a fixed point. Unlike the chain reflex model, however, any perturbation transverse to the stable direc- tion will push the trajectory out of the stable manifold, allowing the trajectory to leave the neighborhood of the fixed point (and potentially travel to the neighborhood of the next fixed point). Arbitrarily small amounts of noise can thus ensure that the system will almost certainly not remain stuck at a given fixed point (Stone and Holmes1990; Armbruster et al. 2003; Gog et al. 1999). In contrast to the stability of states seen in the chain reflex model, the heteroclinic cycle exhibits metastability (Afraimovich et al. 2011), where the trajectory spends long but finite periods of time near each fixed point (Bakhtin 2011). Thus, like the chain reflex, the system can spend short or long peri- ods of time in one particular state depending on sensory input, but, like the limit cycle, the system will eventually transition to the next state even in the absence of sensory input. While stable heteroclinic cycles are structurally unstable (i.e. a small change in the vector field will generally break the cycle), small perturbations can result in the creation of a stable limit cycle that passes very close to the saddles. For example, in the planar case, any sufficiently small per- turbation that pushes the unstable manifold of the saddles towards the inside of the unperturbed stable heteroclinic cycle will result in a stable limit cycle (Reyn 1980). Similar conditions can be found for higher dimensional stable het- eroclinic cycles (Afraimovich et al. 2004a). These families of limit cycles that pass close to the original saddles, known as stable heteroclinic channels (SHCs) (Rabinovich et al. 2008), are structurally stable, and exhibit many of the same properties of sensitivity and metastability as the original stable heteroclinic cycles. As we will see, this extreme sensitivity can be advantageous for generating adaptive behaviors. In the next section we provide an example of model dynamics f( a,μ ), parameterized by a scalar parameter μ, that exhibits a limit cycle for μ> 0 and a bifurcation to a heteroclinic cycle at μ = 0. We then demonstrate that the full system (a, x) displays an abrupt transition between “limit cycle” and “heteroclinic” dynamics depending on the balance between sensory feedback ( ϵ) and intrinsic excitability (μ). 3 Model description 3.1 Neural model We wish to explore the effects of different types of neural dynamics on the behavior of the animal. Although detailed, multi-cellular and multi-conductance models of neurons and circuits underlying feeding pattern generation in Aplysia have been described (Baxter and Byrne 2006; Cataldo et al. 2006; Susswein et al. 2002), the complexity of these mod- els makes it difficult to use them for mathematical analysis. As a consequence, we choose to represent neural pools (which contain neurons that are electrically coupled to 