Patterns of Locomotor Drive to Motoneurons and Last-Order Interneurons: Clues to the Structure of the CPG R. E. BURKE, A. M. DEGTYARENKO, AND E. S. SIMON Laboratory of Neural Control, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4455 Received 25 October 2000; accepted in ﬁnal form 20 February 2001 Burke, R. E., A. M. Degtyarenko, and E. S. Simon. Patterns of locomotor drive to motoneurons and last-order interneurons: clues to the structure of the CPG. J Neurophysiol 86: 447– 462, 2001. We have examined the linkage between patterns of activity in several hindlimb motor pools and the modulation of oligosynaptic cutaneous reﬂex pathways during ﬁctive locomotion in decerebrate unanesthetized cats to assess the notion that such linkages can shed light on the structure of the central pattern generator (CPG) for locomotion. We have concentrated attention on the cutaneous reﬂex pathways that project to the ﬂexor digitorum longus (FDL) motor pool because of that mus- cle’s unique variable behavior during normal and ﬁctive locomotion in the cat. Differential locomotor control of last-order excitatory interneurons in pathways from low-threshold cutaneous afferents in the superﬁcial peroneal and medial plantar afferents to FDL motoneu- rons is fully documented for the ﬁrst time. The qualitative patterns of differential control are shown to remain the same whether the FDL muscle is active in early ﬂexion, as usually found, or during the extension phase of ﬁctive locomotion, which is less common during ﬁctive stepping. The patterns of motor pool activity and of reﬂex pathway modulation indicate that the ﬂexion phase of ﬁctive locomo- tion has distinct early versus late components. Observations during “normal” and unusual patterns of ﬁctive stepping suggest that some aspects of locomotor pattern formation can be separated from rhythm generation, implying that these two CPG functions may be embodied, at least in part, in distinct neural organizations. The results are discussed in relation to a provisional circuit diagram that could explain the experimental ﬁndings. INTRODUCTION There is abundant evidence that the spinal cord of verte- brates, from primitive ﬁsh to carnivores, contains an autono- mous central pattern generator (CPG) that can produce coor- dinated patterns of motoneuron activation that resemble those observed in actual locomotion (Grillner 1981; Rossignol 1996). A CPG for locomotion may also exist in the human spinal cord, although it is more difﬁcult to demonstrate than in quadrupedal mammals (Calancie et al. 1994; Dimitrijevic et al. 1998). The hallmark for identiﬁcation of a CPG within the CNS is the production of recognizable and reproducible pat- terns of rhythmic output in the absence of instructive external drive from other parts of the CNS or from peripheral sensory feedback. Traditionally, the CPG for locomotion has been studied in terms of rhythmic drive to motoneurons. However, it has been known for some time that a variety of reﬂexes are modulated in amplitude and even reversed in sign during different phases of the stepping cycle, both in animals (Abraham et al. 1985; Andersson et al. 1978; Buford and Smith 1993; Duysens and Pearson 1976; Forssberg 1979; Forssberg et al. 1975, 1977) and man (Duysens et al. 1990; Stein and Capaday 1988; Van Wezel et al. 1997). Intracellular recordings from motoneurons during ﬁctive locomotion have provided clear evidence that the locomotor CPG exerts powerful control of transmission through reﬂex pathways as assessed by phasic modulation of synaptic potentials (Andersson et al. 1978; Schomburg and Behrends 1978a,b). In a series of papers from this laboratory (Degtyarenko et al. 1996, 1998a,b; Fleshman et al. 1984; Floeter et al. 1993; Gossard et al. 1996; Moschovakis et al. 1991; Schmidt et al. 1988), the control of cutaneous and muscle afferent reﬂex pathways during ﬁctive locomotion was used as a tool to investigate the organization of spinal last-order interneurons that project to particular motor nuclei (reviewed in Burke 1999). This work concentrated on synaptic pathways that project to the ﬂexor digitorum longus (FDL) muscle because its motoneurons exhibit unique patterns of activity during loco- motion in normal cats (Carlson-Kuhta et al. 1998; O’Donovan et al. 1982; Smith et al. 1998; Trank and Smith 1996). During unperturbed stepping, the FDL usually exhibits little or no activity during the stance phase but ﬁres a brief, vigorous burst around the time of foot lift-off. This is quite different from the activity in FDL’s close, albeit not exact, mechanical synergist ﬂexor hallucis longus (FHL) (see Lawrence et al. 1993; Young et al. 1993), which is active throughout the stance phase of stepping and becomes silent just before FDL bursts. The dif- ference is particularly interesting because FDL and FHL share mutual monosynaptic group Ia excitation (Fleshman et al. 1984), which is usually an indication of functional synergy (Eccles et al. 1957; Lloyd 1960). The distinction between FDL and FHL ﬁring patterns persists during backward walking in the cat, although in this case, FDL ﬁres at the transition into stance rather than into swing (Trank and Smith 1996). The present paper examines observations obtained largely from FDL motoneurons during spontaneous and stimulation- evoked ﬁctive locomotion with regard to what they suggest Address for reprint requests: R. E. Burke, Lab. of Neural Control, NINDS, Bldg. 49, Rm. 3A50, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4455 (E-mail: reburke@helix.nih.gov). The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked ‘‘advertisement’’ in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. 4470022-3077/01 $5.00 Copyright © 2001 The American Physiological Societywww.jn.org Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. about the organization of the locomotor CPG itself. A prelim- inary report has appeared in abstract form (Burke et al. 1996). METHODS The methods used for the present experiments have been described in recent reports from this laboratory (Degtyarenko et al. 1996, 1998a,b; Gossard et al. 1996; Moschovakis et al. 1991). Some of the results reported in the present paper were extracted from data tapes made during this earlier work but not previously published. We are grateful to Drs. Adonis Moschovakis, Gerald N. Sholomenko, Mary Kay Floeter, and Jean-Pierre Gossard for their participation in col- lecting these data. The experiments were conducted in accordance with the “Principles of Laboratory Animal Care” (National Institutes of Health Publication 86-23) and were approved by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Committee on Animal Care and Use. Brieﬂy, 50 adult female cats (2.5– 4.0 kg) were used. Halothane anesthesia was induced by mask and maintained (1–2% in air or oxygen) via a tracheal cannula during surgery. One common carotid artery was cannulated for blood pressure monitoring and the other was ligated. Intravenous catheters were placed in both cephalic veins for administration of norepinephrine and ﬂuids as necessary to maintain blood pressure within physiological limits. The urinary bladder was catheterized. Rectal temperature was maintained near 38°C with a heating pad and lamp. The following muscle nerves in the left hindlimb were cut and mounted on bipolar platinum wire electrodes for stimulation and recording: posterior biceps-semitendinosus (PBST), lateral gastrocne- mius and soleus (LGS), medial gastrocnemius (MG), FDL, FHL, tibialis anterior (TA), and extensor digitorum longus (EDL). Cutane- ous branches of the superﬁcial peroneal (SP), medial plantar (MPL), and, in a few experiments, the saphenous (SAPH) nerves were freed but not cut; all were mounted on bipolar stimulating electrodes. Muscle nerves in the other limbs were not prepared for recording because the primary aim of these experiments was to examine ipsi- lateral reﬂex pathway modulation. After a laminectomy exposing spinal segments L 4–S1, the animals were transferred to a stereotaxic frame and skin ﬂaps surrounding the spinal cord, and the hindlimb nerves were used to construct parafﬁn oil pools. Precollicular postmammillary decerebration was performed by removing all rostral brain tissue and cauterized vessels. Anesthesia was then discontinued. The animal was paralyzed with gallamine triethiodide (Flaxedil; 10 mg/kg supplemented every 40 – 60 min) and artiﬁcially ventilated to maintain expired CO 2 near 4%. Recording and stimulation The cord dorsum potential (CDP) was recorded with a platinum ball electrode placed near the dorsal root entry zone at the L 6–L7 border. Stimulation intensity to peripheral nerves was expressed in multiples of the threshold for the most excitable ﬁbers in the nerve (usually at twice threshold or 2 3 T). Intracellular recordings from motoneurons in the L 6–L7 segments were made with glass micropipettes (1.0 –2.0 mm tip diameter) ﬁlled wit h2MK 1 acetate solution containing 26 mM QX314 (Alomone Laboratories, Jerusalem, Israel) to suppress sodium-dependent action potentials (Frazier et al. 1970). Motoneu- rons were identiﬁed by antidromic invasion from muscle nerve stim- ulation during the several minute period required for spike blockade to occur. To produce ﬁctive locomotion, a monopolar tungsten electrode insulated except at the tip was placed into the mesencephalic loco- motor region (MLR; nominal coordinates: P2, L4, HC 21), usually ipsilateral to the side of recording. Constant-current (70 –150 mA) biphasic, charge balanced pulses (pulse duration, 0.2– 0.5 ms sepa- rated by an equal interval) were delivered in trains (12–30 Hz), referenced to a wire in the neck muscles. The optimal position of the MLR electrode was adjusted to produce rhythmic alternating activity in hindlimb muscle nerves (ﬁctive locomotion), which was usually accompanied by distinctive CDP waves (Degtyarenko et al. 1998a). Data collection and analysis Intracellular potential, CDP, and electroneurogram (ENG) activity in muscle nerves (usually LGS, FHL, FDL, TA or EDL, and PBST), were recorded with an eight-channel digital videotape recorder (In- strutech VR-100B; band-pass DC-9 kHz for the intracellular channel). Timing pulses that were synchronized with stimuli delivered to pe- ripheral nerves and to the MLR were recorded on digital signal channels to permit selected synaptic potentials to be averaged during off-line data analysis. Synaptic potentials were evoked in motoneurons during ﬁctive locomotion by alternately stimulating the SP and MPL nerves, usually at a rate of 10 Hz each (Fig. 1) (see Moschovakis et al. 1991 for detailed discussion of the technique). The data from selected portions of the data tapes were digitized off-line (10 kHz) using an Apple Macintosh PowerPC computer and National Instruments NB-MIO-16 A/D board. Data collection and analysis were done with “virtual instrument” programs written with the LabView software package (National Instruments, Austin, TX). In most cases, the phases of ﬁctive locomotion were deﬁned from the digitized ENG data streams, which were rectiﬁed and smoothed using decremental look-ahead FIG. 1. Differential modulation of superﬁcial peroneal (SP) and medial plantar (MPL) excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) in ﬂexor digitorum longus (FDL) motoneurons. Averaged records of SP ( A–C; n 5 33) and MPL (D–F; n 5 32) EPSPs without locomotion (A and D; rest; n 5 12 in both cases) and during the extension ( B and E) and early ﬂexion ( C and F) phases during ﬁctive locomotion (stimulus intensity 2 3 T in all cases). Note the general amplitude enhancement and shortened central latencies in early ﬂexion phase SP EPSPs and suppression of MPL EPSPs during the ﬂexion phase. The rest examples (A and D) were obtained in some of the same cells studied during locomotion. EPSP amplitudes at 2.5 ms latency (- - -) are shown in Fig. 2. 448 R. E. BURKE, A. M. DEGTYARENKO, AND E. S. SIMON Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. exponential weighting with a time constant of;34 ms. This algorithm provided a good match between the onsets and offsets of raw ENG bursts and the smoothed waveforms. The program allowed ENG burst onsets and offsets to be deter- mined either automatically by threshold crossing or manually when signal-to-noise ratios were low. The start of each ﬂexion phase during ﬁctive locomotion was taken as the onset of ﬁring in the ﬂexor motoneurons, FDL and/or PBST, and the offset of ﬁring in extensor nerves (LGS and/or FHL) and ended with the termination of bursts in TA or EDL muscle nerves and the onset of extensor ﬁring. The remaining time periods were deﬁned as extension phases (e.g., Fig. 3). The ﬂexion and extension phases were each subdivided into three equal time bins. Because of their variable durations, the time bins in the two phases usually did not have the same absolute durations. The timing pulses associated with central and peripheral nerve stimuli were used to trigger the computer to average together the intracellular potentials and CDPs resulting from stimuli falling into the appropriate locomotion phase bins (Degtyarenko et al. 1996; Moschovakis et al. 1991). Each average included at least eight sweeps and sweep numbers were usually .20. The MLR stimuli were not synchronized to these pulses. When MLR stimulation produced sig- niﬁcant postsynaptic potentials (PSPs), cutaneous PSPs were averaged only when they fell within an acceptance window that excluded nearby MLR stimuli. The analysis program also allowed exclusion of responses that produced action potentials (Degtyarenko et al. 1996). Central EPSP latencies were measured as the time between the peak of the ﬁrst deﬂection of the CDP and the onset of the intracellular PSP (e.g., Fig. 4, B and D). This assumes that the excitatory PSP (EPSP) results from action of the most rapidly conducting afferents in the peripheral nerve. RESULTS The aim of the present report is to discuss the implications of interactions between cutaneous and muscle afferent reﬂex pathways and the CPG for locomotion in the adult cat spinal cord. Some of the material in this paper is drawn from exper- iments that have been reported elsewhere in other contexts (Degtyarenko et al. 1996, 1998a,b; Gossard et al. 1996). How- ever, the speciﬁc observations in this paper have not been published previously. Locomotor modulation of cutaneous EPSP in FDL motoneurons Previous publications from this laboratory have demon- strated differential modulation of oligosynaptic EPSPs pro- duced by low-threshold afferents in the SP and MPL nerves in FDL motoneurons during ﬁctive locomotion in adult cats (Moschovakis et al. 1991; see also Degtyarenko et al. 1996, 1998b). However, the earlier papers did not provide complete documentation of the available material. Figure 1 presents summary records of averaged SP EPSPs from 33 FDL mo- toneurons during extension and early ﬂexion phases of ﬁctive locomotion ( B and C), and EPSPs during periods without ﬁctive stepping in 12 of these cells ( A). Corresponding records of MPL EPSPs in 32 of the same FDL cells are shown in D–F. With both inputs, EPSPs during extension phases resembled those at rest. However, the SP EPSPs during early ﬂexion (Fig. 1C) were notably larger and displayed shorter central latencies. In marked contrast, the MPL EPSPs during early ﬂexion were markedly reduced (Fig. 1 F). The amplitudes and latencies of these EPSPs are shown in Fig. 2. The data in each graph are indexed sequentially on the abscissae by increasing extension phase EPSP amplitudes ( A and C, E; measured at 2.5-ms central latency, - - - in Fig. 1) or minimum central latencies ( B and D; see METHODS). The am- plitudes of SP and MPL EPSPs in the absence of ﬁctive locomotion (“rest”) were roughly the same as those found during the extension phases of locomotion. However, the peak amplitudes of SP EPSPs at 2.5 ms during the ﬂexion phase were considerably larger in most (25/33) FDL cells (Fig. 2 A). In contrast, the ﬂexion phase MPL EPSPs were either unde- tectable or much smaller than the extension phase responses in all 28 FDL cells that exhibited any extensor phase EPSP. Central latencies of SP EPSPs (Fig. 2 B) were shorter during ﬂexion than in extension or at rest in most cells (28/33), with the majority #2.0 ms (27/33). Over half of the sample of MPL EPSPs had central latencies #2.0 ms at rest or during the extension phase, and all but two FDL cells had MPL EPSPs with latencies #2.2 ms. It was not possible to measure central latencies of MPL EPSPs during ﬂexion. Cutaneous EPSPs with central latencies #2.2 ms are assumed to be disynaptic in the subsequent material (see DISCUSSION). Inﬂuence of afferent stimulation on FDL ﬁring patterns To deﬁne patterns of locomotor modulation of a reﬂex pathway it is necessary to superimpose low-frequency repeti- tive stimulation of pathway afferents during spontaneous or MLR-induced ﬁctive locomotion (Schmidt et al. 1988; Schom- burg and Behrends 1978b). Superimposing afferent input on locomotor rhythms can change step-cycle durations as well as patterns of motoneuron activity, especially with relatively high-frequency input (Fleshman et al. 1984). Although we have not systematically analyzed the possible alterations in the baseline “state” of the locomotor CPG produced by our method of probing reﬂex pathways, considerable experience with this method suggests that low-frequency, low-strength cutaneous stimulation produces only subtle changes in the system. In- deed, such changes are a major issue in this report. In the example shown in Fig. 3A, with stimulation of the SP nerve alone at 10 Hz superimposed on spontaneous locomo- tion, FDL ﬁred in short bursts during the ﬁrst third of the ﬂexion phase, accompanied by sharp depolarizing locomotor drive potentials (LDPs) (Jordan 1983) evident in the intracel- lular record from an FDL motoneuron ( top trace; arrows). In contrast, during superimposed 10-Hz stimulation of the MPL nerve alone, the depolarizing LDPs and the FDL bursts disap- peared (open arrows), without changing the basic locomotor rhythm. Mean step cycle durations were 2.5 6 0.3 (SD) s during SP alone and 2.4 6 0.6 s during MPL alone stimulation. The hyperpolarizations of the FDL motoneuron during the last 2/3 of ﬂexion in the two episodes were superimposable. Com- parison of averaged hyperpolarizing pulses delivered to the motoneuron (5 nA, 10 Hz interleaved with nerve stimuli; downward deﬂections in the intracellular traces) showed that the cell input resistance ( RN) decreased during late ﬂexion (RN 5 0.60 MV from RN 5 0.75 MV during extension), indicat- ing that the hyperpolarization resulted from active inhibition of the FDL motoneurons coincident with TA motor pool ﬁring. Similar behavior was observed in several other animals. An analogous result was found in a different animal with SP stimulation at two intensities superimposed on spontaneous ﬁctive stepping (Fig. 4). With 10 Hz SP stimulation at 1.5 3 T, 449STRUCTURE OF THE LOCOMOTOR CPG Downloaded from journals.physiology.org/journal/jn (097.120.200.165) on October 1, 2024. there were no depolarizing LDPs in the intracellular records from an FDL motoneuron, and no early ﬂexion bursts in either FDL or PBST muscle nerves (open arrows). Nevertheless, the averaged SP EPSPs were clearly modulated, with maximum facilitation during F1 (Fig. 4 B, heavy arrow) and minimum central latency of 2.2 ms. Increasing the stimulus strength to 2.0 3 T produced depolarizing LDPs and bursting in both FDL and PBST nerves (Fig. 4C), with little evident alteration in the frequency of ﬁctive stepping (the time base in A and C is the same). The EPSPs averaged with the higher stimulus intensit