Functional subdivision of feline spinal interneurons in reflex pathways from group Ib and II muscle afferents; an update Elzbieta Jankowska1 and Steve A Edgley2 1Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden 2Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 3DY, UK Abstract A first step towards understanding the operation of a neural network is identification of the populations of neurons that contribute to it. Our aim here is to re-assess the basis for subdivision of adult mammalian spinal interneurons that mediate reflex actions from tendon organs (group Ib afferents) and muscle spindle secondary endings (group II afferents) into separate populations. Re- examining the existing experimental data, we find no compelling reasons to consider intermediate zone interneurons with input from group Ib afferents to be distinct from those co-excited by group II afferents. Similar patterns of distributed input have been found in subpopulations that project ipsilaterally, contralaterally or bilaterally, and in both excitatory and inhibitory interneurons; differences in input from group I and II afferents to individual interneurons showed intra- rather than inter-population variation. Patterns of reflex actions evoked from group Ib and II afferents and task dependent changes in these actions, e.g. during locomotion, may likewise be compatible with mediation by premotor interneurons integrating information from both group I and II afferents. Pathological changes after injuries of the central nervous system in humans and the lineage of different subclasses of embryonic interneurons may therefore be analyzed without need to consider subdivision of adult intermediate zone interneurons into subpopulations with group Ib or group II input. We propose re-naming these neurons “group I/II interneurons”. Keywords Spinal cord; interneurons; reflex actions; muscle spindles; tendon organs Introduction Spinal interneural networks are exceptionally complex, but play a pivotal role in determining motor output. In a network of many elements, the obvious first approach is to seek to identify groups of neurons with common properties as its building blocks. In many neural networks, such as the retina or cerebellar cortex, distinct populations of neurons with specific functions can be identified based on morphology, connectivity, membrane properties, transmitter/receptor expression patterns, and increasingly in terms of embryonic transcription factor expression patterns. Despite very substantial effort, mammalian spinal cord circuitry has not as yet revealed a basis for categorization that can be applied to more than a fraction of its neurons, and this continues to hamper progress in understanding how Corresponding author E. Jankowska, Dept. of Physiology, Medicinaregatan 11, Box 432, 405 30 Göteborg, Sweden, Fax +46 31 786 3505, Elzbieta.Jankowska@physiol.gu.se. NIH Public Access Author Manuscript Eur J Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 1. Published in final edited form as: Eur J Neurosci. 2010 September ; 32(6): 881–893. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2010.07354.x. NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript spinal neuronal networks operate. This situation may change in the near future. A recent review on the organization of spinal interneuronal networks led to the conclusion that ”… the advent of novel molecular and genetic techniques coupled with recent advances in our knowledge of spinal cord development means that a comprehensive understanding of how the motor circuitry is organized and operates may be within our grasp (Goulding, 2009).” This conclusion refers principally to the neuronal networks that underlie spinally generated rhythmic locomotor movements, but the recent advances in developmental biology combined with those on adult interneuronal networks might allow its extension to other forms of behaviour. However, two major intermediary stages might be needed before we take full advantage of these advances. One would be to define which adult spinal interneurons are essential elements of the networks generating rhythmic locomotor movements, and which are not. This question is less important for species in which practically all forms of motor behaviour might boil down to being variants of locomotion, such as frog embryos, lampreys or zebra fish, but is important for mammals, especially humans, where spinal neurons contribute to a great variety of phasic, as well as rhythmic movements, from the simplest to the most skilled voluntary movements. Depending on the proportions of mammalian neurons that mediate both phasic and rhythmic movements, conclusions based on studies of rhythmically active interneurons may, or may not generalize to other interneurons. A second intermediary stage would involve defining relationships between various classes of embryonic neurons (defined by transcription factor expression patterns during development) and the various populations of adult neurons that develop from them [for recent reviews see Goulding, 2009; Grillner & Jessell, 2009; Garcia-Campmany, 2010]. In addition to motoneurons, relationships have so far been firmly established between mammalian embryonic spinal neurons of class V1 and two classes of adult interneurons: Renshaw cells and Ia inhibitory interneurons [see e.g. (Moran-Rivard et al., 2001; Pierani et al., 2001; Sapir et al., 2004; Alvarez et al., 2005; Gosgnach et al., 2006)]. Steps have been made to relate embryonic neurons of classes dl6, V0 and some V3 embryonic commissural interneurons to adult commissural interneurons (Moran-Rivard et al., 2001; Pierani et al., 2001; Lanuza et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2008), although which specific adult commissural interneurons (e.g. dorsal horn, intermediate zone or lamina VIII; excitatory or inhibitory) are derived from subclasses of these embryonic interneurons has not yet been fully established. Steps have been also made to relate V2a, V2b and some V3 embryonic interneurons to ipsilaterally projecting adult interneurons (Al-Mosawie et al., 2007; Lundfald et al., 2007; Crone et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2008), dl1, dl2, dl3 neurons to as-yet unspecified adult ascending tract neurons (Gross et al., 2002) and dl4 neurons to interneurons mediating presynaptic inhibition (Betley et al., 2009). One of the reasons why these relationships have been difficult to establish is that very few classes of adult spinal interneurons are well defined. Groups of adult interneurons can be defined based on a variety of properties, some of which are not unique to one group, so borderlines between various interneuronal populations are not always sharp. In addition several criteria are needed to identify individual interneurons in functional terms, such as transmitter phenotype, target cells, patterns of input and modes of modulation, and not all of these can be examined under specific experimental conditions. This review considers the subdivision of spinal interneurons that process information on three major parameters of muscle states: the tension developed during muscle contractions, muscle length and the dynamics of changes in the length. This information is provided by tendon organs (via group Ib afferents), muscle spindle secondary endings (via group II afferents) and muscle spindle primary endings (via group Ia afferents) respectively (Matthews, 1972). Initial expectations were that such specific signals would be processed by Jankowska and Edgley Page 2 Eur J Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript different interneurons. Electrophysiological analyses, however, provided evidence that many spinal interneurons are co-excited by several types of primary afferents (see below). Consistent with this, it was demonstrated that interneurons processing information from group Ib afferents are co-excited by group Ia afferents (Fetz et al., 1979; Czarkowska et al., 1981; Jankowska et al., 1981a; Jankowska et al., 1981b; c; Harrison & Jankowska, 1985b). Considering the distinctive response properties of group Ia and Ib afferents, integration of information from these afferents by the same interneurons was a surprising finding but since then has been generally accepted. This review raises the question whether the same interneurons integrate information from group II afferents as well, and re-considers the subdivision of spinal interneurons in reflex pathways from group Ib tendon organ afferents and group II muscle spindle afferents into separate populations of “Ib interneurons” and “group II interneurons”. Interneurons mediating actions evoked by stimulation of group Ib and II afferents have traditionally been considered to be distinct functional populations, characterized by selective, or at least dominant input from the categories of afferents after which they were named [for review see (Jankowska, 1992)]. However, on re-examination of the properties of these interneurons; we find that the reflex actions of group Ib afferents are mediated by premotor interneurons (i.e. interneurons directly exciting or inhibiting alpha- motoneurons) alternatively termed last order interneurons, that integrate information from group II as well as group Ib afferents, whereas the actions of group II afferents are relayed both by these interneurons and by other interneurons that have more selective group II input. Neurons integrating inputs from group Ib and group II afferents are located within Rexed’s laminae V–VII of the spinal cord (Rexed, 1954.); see Fig. 2, the region of the grey matter often referred to as the intermediate zone. Neurons with more selective input from group II afferents are located primarily in laminae IV and VIII (Edgley & Jankowska, 1987b). The population of intermediate zone interneurons includes subpopulations of neurons that project ipsilaterally and/or contralaterally and both excitatory and inhibitory interneurons (Bannatyne et al., 2009). However, the evidence presented in this review shows that in all of these subpopulations differences between individual interneurons mediating reflex actions from group Ib afferents and/or from group II afferents are only minor, not distinctive, and they may therefore operate as one functional population. Defining functional populations of interneurons The characteristics of functional interneuronal populations may not be as obvious as for populations defined by their transmitter phenotype, axonal projections or embryonic origin. The main feature of functional populations is that they subserve a particular motor synergy or a particular kind of reaction. Examples of motor synergies are inhibition of flexor motoneurons associated with monosynaptically evoked stretch reflex of extensor muscles operating across the same joint, or excitation of flexors associated with inhibition of extensors throughout a limb during active flexion of a limb. Each of these synergies requires the concerted action of a variety of interneurons. The first synergy would require Ia inhibitory interneurons that mediate reciprocal inhibition between flexors and extensors but also between extensors and flexors to ensure a proper balance between the degree of activation of antagonists. The second synergy will depend on interneurons that mediate appropriately distributed and timed excitation of flexor and the intimately associated inhibition of extensor motoneurons, so will depend on interneurons with different transmitter phenotypes and axonal projections. Examples of interneurons that subserve particular reactions are interneurons that mediate limb withdrawal from painful stimuli, or interneurons that ensure co-ordinated rhythmic activation of muscles on both sides of the body during locomotion, or on one side of the body during scratching. These are likely to include interneurons that subserve various motor synergies, but also other categories of interneurons. Jankowska and Edgley Page 3 Eur J Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript The choice of criteria allowing classification of a group of interneurons as of one functional population may thus depend on the basis of the subdivision. However, interneurons within a functional population should share the essential features and show only minor differences. Minor differences between members of a population are easiest to illustrate for unequivocally identified functional classes of neurons, e.g. Renshaw cells. The population of Renshaw cells includes neurons with somewhat differing somatic locations, extents of dendritic arborisation, directions and extents of axonal projections, and distributions of terminal axonal branches within and outside the motor nuclei: these reflect intra-population variability. In contrast, there are characteristic properties specific to Renshaw cells that are not shared by other inhibitory interneurons located nearby (such as Ia inhibitory interneurons), showing that Renshaw cells are a clearly distinct functional interneuronal population. These differences include in particular the origin of the input and the target cells. In adult animals Renshaw cells are directly excited by motoneuron axon collaterals but not by muscle spindle group Ia afferents while the converse is true for Ia inhibitory interneurons [for references see (Eccles et al., 1961a; Windhorst, 1990; Jankowska, 1992; Alvarez & Fyffe, 2007)]. There are also essential differences in their output connections: Renshaw cells inhibit other Renshaw cells as well as Ia interneurons but the converse is not true. They also target different alpha-motoneurons; Renshaw cells target motoneurons that are synergistic to those providing input to them while motoneurons of antagonist muscles are targeted by Ia interneurons. These differences were originally found in adult animals (cat, rat, primates) but recently also demonstrated in neonatal mice (Wang et al., 2008). At some stages of development these two populations of interneurons share input from group Ia afferents which are subsequently withdrawn from Renshaw cells (Mentis et al., 2006) and express GABA as well as glycine; glycine continues to act as transmitter together with GABA in adult Renshaw cells (Schneider & Fyffe, 1992) but is the only transmitter of Ia inhibitory interneurons (Wang et al., 2008). This is in keeping with the origin of these two populations of interneurons from the same embryonic progenitor cells, concluded to be class V1 ventral interneurons, with precursors expressing the transcription factors Pax6 and En1 (Burrill et al., 1997; Ericson et al., 1997; Sapir et al., 2004; Alvarez et al., 2005; Goulding, 2009). Nevertheless, Wang et al. (2008) recently raised the question whether all Ia interneurons and Renshaw cells originate from precursors expressing the transcription factor Pax6 as they found that Ia reciprocal inhibition is present in Pax6 mutant mice in which Renshaw cells fail to develop. It is thus possible that reciprocal inhibition might be at least partially mediated by some as yet undefined embryonic class as well as V1 interneurons (Goulding, 2009). Furthermore, differences in input from peripheral afferents found in individual interneurons do not necessarily imply that these interneurons belong to different functional populations because input to neurons within one population may vary. Variations in input were reported for Ia interneurons (Hultborn & Udo, 1972), for Renshaw cells (Ryall & Piercey, 1971; Ryall et al., 1972) as well as for interneurons with dominant group Ib (Harrison & Jankowska, 1985b) or group II input (Edgley & Jankowska, 1987b; Edgley, 2001). Conversely, interneurons with similar inputs need not necessarily belong to the same functional population. Examples are motoneurons and Ia inhibitory interneurons (both of which are monosynaptically excited by the same Ia afferents and inhibited by the same groups of Renshaw cells), Ia interneurons and Renshaw cells (both inhibited by the same groups of Renshaw cells), Ia inhibitory interneurons, Ib interneurons and dorsal spinocerebellar tract neurons [all three with monosynaptic input from the same groups of Ia afferents; for references see (Jankowska, 1992)]. Many interneurons have multisensory input, from both several types of afferent and from many different muscles. In classifying interneurons it is easy to subdivide them based on the Jankowska and Edgley Page 4 Eur J Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2011 September 1. NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript combinations of inputs found in individual interneurons. A problem with this approach is the generation of very large numbers of different classes of interneurons based on what might be minor differences. Given a substantial number of neurons, a more appropriate way to envisage a population might be to consider the distribution of inputs among the population, for example connections from one type of afferent or a specific muscle might occur in a certain proportion of individual neurons in a population, but not all of them. Taking this approach one of the hallmarks of a specific population might be a given probability of finding a particular input; in one population the combinations of inputs should thus be found in proportions predicted if the inputs were distributed independently; in different populations (with different distributions of inputs) the probabilities of finding given inputs would be different. This approach has been taken for afferent inputs to samples of interneurons with inputs from Ib and group II afferents, in which the probability distribution suggests a single functional population (Harrison & Jankowska, 1985a; Edgley, 2001) and for descending inputs to interneurons with group II input where distinctly different populations could be identified (Davies & Edgley, 1994). Intermediate zone premotor interneurons with input from group I and/or group II afferents operate as one functional population despite differences in input to individual interneurons Subdivision of intermediate zone adult interneurons into those with dominant input from group I or II muscle afferents is often easily done when they are sampled using extracellular recording and when electrical stimulation of muscle nerves is used to activate them. Most neurons are discharged by stimuli that are either below or well above threshold for group II afferents (Fig. 1A and C respectively) and fewer respond to stimulation of both group I and group II afferents (Fig. 1B). This is possible because electrical stimulation very conveniently activates group I and group II afferents in different intensity ranges. Group I afferents are activated at intensities generally less than twice the threshold of the most excitable fibers in a muscle nerve while group II afferents are activated generally at 2–5 times this threshold (Matthews, 1972; Jack, 1978). Selective activation of group Ia or group Ib afferents is less easily achieved, usually requiring a combination of electrical and natural stimuli, and was not attempted in most experiments comparing input from group I and II afferents to intermediate zone interneurons. However, in previous experiments dedicated to this issue, group Ia and Ib afferents were demonstrated to co-excite these interneurons (Fetz et al., 1979; Jankowska et al., 1981a; Jankowska et al., 1981b; c; Harrison & Jankowska, 1985b). The subdivision based on input from group I or II muscle afferents is much less sharp when the interneurons are examined intracellularly, because EPSPs from group I afferents frequently precede those from group II afferents in interneurons in which extracellular spike potentials are only induced by group II afferents (