 doi:10.1152/jn.00065.2005 94:4256-4268, 2005. First published 27 July 2005;J Neurophysiol Örjan Ekeberg and Keir Pearson the Stance-to-Swing Transition the Cat: An Examination of Mechanisms Regulating Computer Simulation of Stepping in the Hind Legs of You might find this additional info useful... 32 articles, 12 of which can be accessed free at:This article cites http://jn.physiology.org/content/94/6/4256.full.html#ref-list-1 6 other HighWire hosted articles, the first 5 are:This article has been cited by [PDF] [Full Text] [Abstract] , March 1, 2007; 97 (3): 2499-2510.J Neurophysiol Lisa Guevremont, Jonathan A. Norton and Vivian K. Mushahwar Functional Electrical Stimulation Physiologically Based Controller for Generating Overground Locomotion Using [PDF] , August 10, 2007; .Integr. Comp. Biol. Arthur Prochazka and Sergiy Yakovenko Predictive and reactive tuning of the locomotor CPG [PDF] [Full Text] [Abstract] , October , 2007; 47 (4): 474-481.Integr. Comp. Biol. Arthur Prochazka and Sergiy Yakovenko Predictive and reactive tuning of the locomotor CPG [PDF] [Full Text] [Abstract] , May , 2009; 101 (5): 2297-2304.J Neurophysiol Sasha N. Zill, Bridget R. Keller and Elizabeth R. Duke of Load and Emergent Coordination in Cockroach Walking Sensory Signals of Unloading in One Leg Follow Stance Onset in Another Leg: Transfer [PDF] [Full Text] [Abstract] , October 14, 2009; 29 (41): 12807-12814.J. Neurosci. Hillel J. Chiel, Lena H. Ting, Örjan Ekeberg and Mitra J. Z. Hartmann The Brain in Its Body: Motor Control and Sensing in a Biomechanical Context including high resolution figures, can be found at:Updated information and services http://jn.physiology.org/content/94/6/4256.full.html can be found at:Journal of Neurophysiologyabout Additional material and information http://www.the-aps.org/publications/jn This infomation is current as of August 11, 2011. American Physiological Society. ISSN: 0022-3077, ESSN: 1522-1598. Visit our website at http://www.the-aps.org/. (monthly) by the American Physiological Society, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda MD 20814-3991. Copyright © 2005 by the publishes original articles on the function of the nervous system. It is published 12 times a yearJournal of Neurophysiology on August 11, 2011jn.physiology.org Downloaded from Computer Simulation of Stepping in the Hind Legs of the Cat: An Examination of Mechanisms Regulating the Stance-to-Swing Transition O¨ rjan Ekeberg and Keir Pearson Department of Computer Science, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden; and Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada Submitted 19 January 2005; accepted in ﬁnal form 25 July 2005 Ekeberg, O¨ rjan and Keir Pearson. Computer simulation of stepping in the hind legs of the cat: an examination of mechanisms regulating the stance-to-swing transition. J Neurophysiol 94: 4256 – 4268, 2005. First published July 27, 2005; doi:10.1152/jn.00065.2005. Physiolog- ical studies in walking cats have indicated that two sensory signals are involved in terminating stance in the hind legs: one related to unload- ing of the leg and the other to hip extension. To study the relative importance of these two signals, we developed a three-dimensional computer simulation of the cat hind legs in which the timing of the swing-to-stance transition was controlled by signals related to the force in ankle extensor muscles, the angle at the hip joint, or a combination of both. Even in the absence of direct coupling between the controllers for each leg, stable stepping was easily obtained using either a combination of ankle force and hip position signals or the ankle force signal alone. Stable walking did not occur when the hip position signal was used alone. Coupling the two controllers by mutual inhibition restored stability, but it did not restore the correct timing of stepping of the two hind legs. Small perturbations applied during the swing phase altered the movement of the contralateral leg in a manner that tended to maintain alternating stepping when the ankle force signal was included but tended to shift coordination away from alternating when the hip position signal was used alone. We conclude that coordination of stepping of the hind legs depends critically on load-sensitive signals from each leg and that mechanical linkages between the legs, mediated by these signals, play a signiﬁ- cant role in establishing the alternating gait. INTRODUCTION Over the past decade there has been considerable progress in our knowledge of the neuronal mechanisms regulating walking in mammals. At the cellular level, studies in neonatal rats and mice have yielded insights into the organization of central pattern generating networks (Cazalets et al. 1995; Kjaerulff and Kiehn 1996), the identiﬁcation of interneurons that are involved in generating and coordinating centrally generated rhythms (Butt et al. 2002; Stokke et al. 2002), and the prop- erties of neurons involved in pattern generation (Kiehn 1991). At the systems level, studies of the cat have revealed numerous mechanisms by which afferent signals from peripheral sensory receptors regulate the centrally generated rhythms during the step cycle (Donelan and Pearson 2004; Lam and Pearson 2002), some of which have also been identiﬁed in human infants (Pang and Yang 2000, 2002). An important unresolved issue is whether our current knowledge of the neuronal mech- anisms controlling walking is sufﬁcient to explain the produc- tion of rhythmic stepping movements in normal walking ani- mals. Resolving this issue is not a simple matter. First, it requires an understanding of the complex interactions between the nervous system, muscles, limb and body mechanics, and the environment. Second, it cannot be done using direct ex- perimental approaches because individual neuronal mecha- nisms, or sets of mechanisms, cannot be isolated in behaving animals. In addition, the contribution of other, yet unknown, mechanisms can never be ruled out. One feasible strategy to assess the role of speciﬁc mechanisms is to develop computer simulations of walking systems that incorporate known prop- erties of neuronal systems, muscles, and body mechanics (Ekeberg et al. 2004; Ivashko et al. 2003; Taga 1998; Yak- ovenko et al. 2004). The great advantage of computer simula- tions is that they allow the isolation of individual mechanisms in a functional context. Another potential approach is to con- struct robot systems based on known biology (Fukuoka et al. 2003; Quinn et al. 2003; Ritzmann et al. 2004). However, to date, the results applicable to animal physiology from this approach have been limited, primarily because of the time- consuming process of design and construction and difﬁculty of manufacturing actuators that realistically mimic muscles. Stepping of the cat hind legs is a behavior well suited for simulation studies because we possess considerable knowledge of the associated biology, such as the mechanical properties of the hind legs (Goslow et al. 1973; Hoy and Zernicke 1985), the kinematics of hind leg movements during stepping (Goslow et al. 1973; Miller et al. 1975), the properties of muscles in the cat hind leg (Brown et al. 1996), the patterns of electromyographic activity in many hind leg muscles (Rossignol 1996; Yakovenko et al. 2002), and the neuronal mechanisms controlling stepping (Lam and Pearson 2002; Pearson 2003). This knowledge al- lows reasonably realistic simulation of the mechanics of the legs and muscles and provides constraints on the mechanisms controlling muscle activation. The potential value of realistic simulation of hind leg stepping in the cat has been shown in two recent studies (Ivashko et al. 2003; Yakovenko et al. 2004). Both studies used a two-dimensional simulation of the hind legs to investigate issues related to the control of muscle activation. One led to a proposal for the neuronal architecture for the pattern-generating networks in the spinal cord (Ivashko et al. 2003), whereas the other examined the importance of stretch reﬂexes in controlling the level of activity in leg extensor muscles (Yakovenko et al. 2004).Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: O¨ . Ekeberg, Dept. of Computer Science, Royal Inst. of Technology, S-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden (E-mail: orjan@nada.kth.se). 1The Supplementary Material for this article (a series of videos) is available online at http://jn.physiology.org/cgi/content/full/ 00065-2005/DC1. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. The article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. J Neurophysiol 94: 4256 – 4268, 2005. First published July 27, 2005; doi:10.1152/jn.00065.2005. 4256 0022-3077/05 $8.00 Copyright © 2005 The American Physiological Society www.jn.org on August 11, 2011jn.physiology.org Downloaded from Our interest has focused on using computer simulations to examine some of the sensory mechanisms involved in control- ling stepping of the hind legs of walking cats. Currently, two sensory mechanisms are considered important in controlling the stance-to-swing transition in the hind legs. The ﬁrst is an inhibitory inﬂuence on the system generating ﬂexor bursts from afferents arising from Golgi tendon organs in the ankle extensor muscles. Loading the ankle extensors stops rhythmic locomotor activity in decerebrate walking cats by inhibiting ﬂexor burst generation (Duysens and Pearson 1980), whereas electrical stimulation of group Ib afferents (arising from the Golgi tendon organs) prolongs the stance phase during walking in intact and decerebrate cats (Whelan and Pearson 1997; Whelan et al. 1995) and inhibits ﬂexor burst generation during ﬁctive locomotion in spinal and decerebrate cats (Conway et al. 1987; Guertin et al. 1995). These observations have led to the concept that a necessary condition for the initiation of swing is unloading of the ankle extensor muscles. This occurs naturally near the end of stance because of the transfer of load to the opposite hind leg and the shortening of the ankle extensors. The second sensory mechanism thought to be involved in regulating the stance-to-swing transition is activation of the ﬂexor burst-generating system by sensory signals from affer- ents arising in the hip region. Preventing hip extension stops stepping in spinal cats (Grillner and Rossignol 1978) and imposed extension movement of the hip or stretching hip ﬂexor muscles during stance can initiate ﬂexor burst activity during ﬁctive locomotion and stepping in decerebrate cats, respec- tively (Hiebert et al. 1996; Kriellaars et al. 1994). Thus hip extension is another necessary condition for allowing the initiation of the swing phase. One hypothesis derived from these two sets of ﬁndings is that the transition from the stance phase to the swing phase in the hind legs of intact walking animals is normally initiated by a combined reduction in an inhibitory signal from load-sensitive afferents from the ankle extensor muscles and an increase in an excitatory signal from position-sensitive afferents from the hip onto the system gen- erating ﬂexor bursts (McCrea 2001; Pearson 2003). If true, an important issue is to establish the relative importance of these two mechanisms. Intuitively it seems reasonable that either mechanism acting alone could be effective in controlling the stance-to-swing transition, but this suspicion may be incorrect given the difﬁculty of imagining the consequences of the complex mechanical interactions between the legs and the dependence of these interactions on the geometry of the legs and the state of the ankle extensor muscles. Here we have examined this issue in a simulation of the hind legs by analyzing the effects on the stepping pattern when the stance- to-swing transition was controlled by either a combination of the two mechanisms or by one or the other mechanism alone. METHODS The basis of this study was a three-dimensional forward dynamics simulation of the two hind legs of the cat connected to a rigid trunk that is supported at the front by two stiff front legs, working as struts, sliding on the ground surface without friction (Fig. 1 A). Each leg has three links (thigh, shank, and paw) with four degrees of freedom: two at the hip (ﬂexion-extension and abduction-adduction), one at the knee (ﬂexion-extension), and one at the ankle (ﬂexion-extension). Because we initially could not know precisely which neuro-mechanical inter- actions would be of importance we used a full three-dimensional model to allow possible instabilities involving lateral movements to emerge. With the exception of abduction-adduction movements of the hip, movement at each joint was controlled by torques produced by three muscles arranged in a manner to mimic actual muscles in the cat hind leg. A ﬁnite state controller based on known physiological mechanisms for state transitions and magnitude control was used to establish the level of activation of each muscle. Simulation of leg muscles Seven muscles were included in the model of each leg (Fig. 1 B): ﬁve muscles acting over single joints— hip ﬂexion [iliopsoas (IP)], hip extension [anterior biceps (AB)], knee extension [vastus lateralis (VL)], ankle extension [soleus (Sol)], and ankle ﬂexion [tibialis anterior (TA)]—and two bifunctional muscles— hip extension and knee ﬂexion [posterior biceps and semitendinosus (PB/St)] and knee ﬂexion and ankle extension [gastrocnemius (Gas)]. The simulation of all muscles controlling ﬂexion and extension movements was based on the model of Brown et al. (1996) for the soleus muscle. The parameters used for calculating the force–velocity and force–length relationships are given in the APPENDIX. The force was scaled linearly with the level of activation received from the controller. Each muscle also included an in-series elastic tendon (see APPENDIX). The muscle torque at each joint was obtained by summing the contribution from all muscles acting at the joint. Where explicit moment arms were required (see APPENDIX), they were taken from published papers (Goslow et al. 1973). The muscle lengths were set so that they would normally operate at lengths where force increases with length (see APPENDIX). During the running of the simulation, the lengths and velocities of the muscles were calculated from the geom- FIG.1 . A: mechanical structure of the model. Hind legs are actuated through model muscles, whereas the front legs are ﬁxed and only used as support. This ﬁgure shows a snap- shot from the screen as the simulation is run- ning. B: 7 muscles used for each hind leg. See text for abbreviations. 4257SIMULATION OF STEPPING J Neurophysiol • VOL 94 • DECEMBER 2005 • www.jn.org on August 11, 2011jn.physiology.org Downloaded from etry of the leg segments, lever arms, and the actual angular velocities of joint movements. Abduction and adduction movements of the hip were controlled by a passive linear spring and damper. For small movements, this would correspond to tonically activated muscles (see APPENDIX). Simulation of leg and body mechanics The body and leg segments were modeled as rigid segments with the center of mass located at the midpoint of each segment. The masses of the leg segments were taken from Hoy and Zernicke (1985) (see APPENDIX). The mass of the trunk and hindquarters was taken as 2 kg with the center of mass in the middle of the segment connecting hind and forelegs. The moments of inertia for all segments were calculated from estimates of the segment dimensions (see APPENDIX) assuming a constant density. In the simulation program, the location of each segment was represented by a redundant set of Cartesian coordinates specifying, individually for each segment, the location of its mid-point and its orientation in three-dimensional space. A set of constraint equations was used to specify how the different segments were allowed to move in relation to each other, thus effectively enforcing the joint restrictions. The knee and ankle allowed only one degree of freedom (hinge joints), whereas the hip allowed two (universal joint). This constrained each leg to move in a plane, but this plane could rotate around an axis parallel to the length of the trunk segment (adduction-abduction). The ground was modeled as a ﬂat horizontal surface with some elasticity and damping. While a paw was on the ground, any displace- ment /H9004x(mm) gave rise to a counteracting force of 2.0 /H20849/H9004x/H208503 (N) and, in addition, all downward velocities v were damped by a force 0.08 v/H20849/H9004x/H208502 (N). The resulting ground model had the desired property of absorbing the kinetic energy of the leg at foot impact. The time-course of the movement was simulated by repeatedly, for each time step of 0.25 ms, calculating the next location of all segments. These new locations were calculated efﬁciently by numer- ically solving the Lagrangian equations for the system in combination with the constraint equations. This calculation was done using a multidimensional Newton-Raphson method that involved computing the Jacobian matrix for the entire equation system. Because the entire system involves 180 state variables, special techniques for handling sparse equation systems where used to avoid handling the full 180 /H11003 180 matrix. In particular, Cholesky factorization was used because it preserved the sparse structure of the system. Simulation of the neural control system The activation of the muscles in each leg was controlled by a system that incorporated a selected subset of the known features of the biological system controlling stepping in the hind leg of the cat. We did not attempt to incorporate all the known biological properties into the controller because our aim was to construct a simple, understand- able controller that would still produce stable and realistic stepping movements. Minimizing the complexity has the advantage that the contribution of individual mechanisms can be more readily deter- mined. Each leg was controlled by a separate controller, each progressing sequentially and repeatedly through four states: liftoff, swing, touch- down, and stance. The switching between these states was governed by signals related to the state of the leg, and different sets of muscles were activated in each state (Fig. 2). Liftoff commenced when the FIG.2 . A: schematic drawing of the neural control system. System is separate for each leg, and at any point in time, it is in 1 of 4 states: swing, touchdown, stance, and liftoff. Local sensory signals trigger transition from one state to the next. Each state sends a characteristic activation pattern to the muscles, as shown by the 4 insets on the far left and right. B: screenshots from the 4 phases during simulated normal walking. Activated muscles are colored red. 4258 O¨ . EKEBERG AND K. PEARSON J Neurophysiol • VOL 94 • DECEMBER 2005 • www.jn.org on August 11, 2011jn.physiology.org Downloaded from force in the ankle extensor was low enough and the hip joint sufﬁ- ciently extended. These two factors were combined linearly, so that a low force would initiate the swing at less extension while a higher force would require more extension. This particular rule was in some experiments replaced by alternative rules based on only the muscle force or the hip angle (see RESULTS). The ankle ﬂexor, bifunctional knee ﬂexor, hip extensor, and hip ﬂexor muscles were activated simultaneously to lift the foot from the ground. Swing commenced as soon as the foot left the ground and was produced by activation of the hip and ankle ﬂexors. Touchdown was initiated when a combination of the hip and knee angles passed a preset value. The hip extensor/ knee ﬂexor and ankle extensor/knee ﬂexor were activated during the touchdown phase. Finally, the stance phase was initiated when the foot contacted the ground. The hip extensor, knee extensor, and both muscles extending th