Bioinspiration & Biomimetics PAPER A computational model of insect campaniform sensilla predicts encoding of forces during walking To cite this article: Nicholas S Szczecinski et al 2021 Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 065001 View the article online for updates and enhancements. You may also like The development of a -biomimetic uncooled IR-Sensor inspired by the infrared receptors of Melanophila acuminata Georg Siebke, Peter Holik, Sam Schmitz et al. - Mechanical modeling of mechanosensitive insect strain sensors as a tool to investigate exoskeletal interfaces Gesa F Dinges, William P Zyhowski, Anastasia Lucci et al. - Built to fight: variable loading conditions and stress distribution in stag beetle jaws Jana Goyens, Joris Dirckx and Peter Aerts - This content was downloaded from IP address 131.252.218.112 on 08/07/2024 at 00:05 Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 (2021) 065001 https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-3190/ac1ced RECEIVED 31 March 2021 REVISED 21 June 2021 ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION 12 August 2021 PUBLISHED 7 September 2021 PAPER A computational model of insect campaniform sensilla predicts encoding of forces during walking Nicholas S Szczecinski1,∗ , Chris J Dallmann2 ,R o g e rDQ u i n n3 and Sasha N Zill4 1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, W est Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26505, United States of America 2 Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Washington, Seattle, W A 98195, United States of America 3 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Case W estern Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, United States of America 4 Department of Biomedical Sciences, Joan C Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, WV 25755, United States of America ∗ Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: nicholas.szczecinski@mail.wvu.edu Keywords: campaniform sensilla, sensory feedback, adaptation, hysteresis, yank, power law Supplementary material for this article is available online Abstract Control of forces is essential in both animals and walking machines. Insects measure forces as strains in their exoskeletons via campaniform sensilla (CS). Deformations of cuticular caps embedded in the exoskeleton excite afferents that project to the central nervous system. CS afferent ﬁring frequency (i.e. ‘discharge’) is highly dynamic, correlating with the rate of change of the force. Discharges adapt over time to tonic forces and exhibit hysteresis during cyclic loading. In this study we characterized a phenomenological model that predicts CS discharge, in which discharge is proportional to the instantaneous stimulus force relative to an adaptive variable. In contrast to previous studies of sensory adaptati on, our model (1) is nonlinear and (2) reproduces the characteristic power-law adaptation with ﬁrst order dynamics only (i.e. no ‘fractional derivatives’ are required to explain dynamics). W e solve the response of the system analytically in multiple cases and use these solutions to derive the dynamics of the adaptive variable. W e show that the model can reproduce responses of insect CS to man y different force stimuli after being tuned to reproduce only one response, suggesting that the model captures the underlying dynamics of the system. W e show that adaptation to tonic forces, rate-sensitivity, and hysteresis are different manifestations of the same underlying mechanism: the adaptive variable. W e tune the model to replicate the dynamics of three different CS grou ps from two insects (cockroach and stick insect), demonstrating that it is generalizable. W e also invert the model to estimate the stimulus force given the discharge recording from the animal. W e discuss the adaptive neural and mechanical processes that the model may mimic and the model’s use for understanding the role of load feedback in insect motor control. A preliminary model and results were previously published in the proceedings of the Conference on Biohybrid and Biomimetic Systems. 1. Introduction Campaniform sensilla (CS) are strain-sensitive mechanoreceptors in the exoskeleton of insects (Chapman et al 1973,Z i l la n dM o r a n1981a, Harris et al 2020). Each sensillum consists of a cap in the cuticle that when compressed, mechanically distorts a sensory neuron’s dendrite and causes the afferent to ﬁre action potentials (APs) (ﬁgure 1(a)). Because the strain of a body is proportional to the stress within it, CS can function as force- or load-sensing organs (Ridgel et al 1999, Kaliyamoorthy et al 2005, Zill et al 2011). CS are found wherever an insect’s body experiences signiﬁcant strain during behavior, including on the legs (Harris et al 2020), on the antennae (Mongeau et al 2015), and across wings and halteres (Agrawal et al 2017,D i c k e r s o net al 2021). Insects control their leg posture and locomotion using load feedback from CS (Zill et al 2004,T u t h i l l and Wilson 2016,D i c k e r s o net al 2021), similarly to the way vertebrates use load feedback from Golgi tendon organs (Jami 1992,P r o c h a z k aet al 1997a, 1997b,D u y s e n set al 2000). For example, feedback from leg CS is thought to reinforce muscle activity © 2021 IOP Publishing Ltd Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 (2021) 065001 N S Szczecinski et al Figure 1. (a) Schematic of a campaniform sensillum (CS), illustrating how the cap is deformed by bending moments that compress the cuticle. The cap’s deﬂection strains a sensory neuron’s dendrite, causing it to discharge APs. (b) Schematic of the stick insect leg with recording sites, muscle groups in the femur that actuate the tibia, and tibial CS groups labeled (insect body not shown). Schematic also illustrates the experimental setup. Animals were ﬁxed to a platform with staples. Movements of the FTi joint were prevented by a pin glued to the proximal end of the t ibia. Force was applied by a probe equipped with strain gauges and actuated by a DC motor. (c) Experimental set up for recording from CS of the cockroach leg (similar to (b)). (d) Experimental data characterizing response properties of CS afferents (Ridgel et al 2000) that support the assumptions of the model: discharge (APs per second) is proportional to load, with a small offset; (e) peak discharge during a ramp stimulus is proportional to the rate of load, with a power-law relation; (f) discharge rate decays over time according to a power-law; and (g) discharge exhibits hysteresis under repeated loading. Reprinted by permission from Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH: Springer Nature, Journal of Comparative Physiology A [Ridgel et al.] (c) 2000. during the stance phase of walking (Pearson 1972, Zill et al 2015) and contribute to inter-leg coordi- nation (Zill et al 2009, Dallmann et al 2017). Such pathways appear particularly important during slow walking due to the latency between CS discharge and subsequent motor neuron activation (Zill and Moran 1981b). Despite the apparent importance of CS feed- back during walking, it remains largely unknown pre- cisely how feedback from CS is integrated to con- trol the body, partly due to the technical difﬁculty of targeted experimental manipulations and recordings during natural behavior. Mathematical and robotic models of animal loco- motion are powerful tools with which to address the question of how load feedback is used in body con- trol. In such models, feedback can be manipulated at will, enabling one to test the necessity and sufﬁ- ciency of speciﬁc sensory feedback to perform con- trol tasks (Prochazka and Gorassini1998,E l z i n g aet al 2012,C h u n get al 2015,M a r k i net al 2016,N a r i set al 2020). However, to provide meaningful insights into control, the dynamics of sensory feedback must be modeled realistically. CS are not simple sensors that directly report the forces experienced by the leg to the nervous system. Instead, they have a complicated dynamic response to load (Ridgel et al 2000,Z i l let al 2011,Z i l let al 2018): CS discharge adapts rapidly over time in response to tonic forces and is completely silenced by decreasing forces; CS discharge primar- i l yr e ﬂ e c t st h ep o s i t i v er a t eo fc h a n g eo ff o r c e ,b u t with a power-law scaling; CS discharge exhibits hys- teresis, wherein the afferent ﬁring reﬂects both the instantaneous and past load imposed on the CS. T o better understand the functional role of load feedback in posture and locomotion, a mathematical model is needed that can relate recordings of CS discharge to the forces acting on the leg (Goldsmith et al 2020). Mathematical models have been formulated to describe the afferent ﬁring of CS (Chapmanet al 1979, Szczecinski et al 2020), other load sensors such as spi- der slit sensilla (T orkkeli and French2002)a n dv e r t e - brate Golgi tendon organs (Prochazka and Gorassini 1998). Models have also been developed for other sensory afferents (Dallmann et al 2021), including insect hair ﬁelds (Ache and Dürr 2015), insect cerci (Chapman and Smith 1963), insect photoreceptors (Thorson and Biederman-Thorson 1974), vertebrate muscle spindles (Prochazka and Gorassini 1998, Blum et al 2020), and others. All these sensory sys- tems show adaptation in neural activity in response to tonic inputs (French 1984). A particularly intrigu- ing property of many of these afferents is that they adapt to tonic inputs according to a power-law over time, e.g. y = a· tk,w h e r ey is the sensory discharge, 2 Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 (2021) 065001 N S Szczecinski et al Ta b le 1 .List of abbreviations. Abbreviation Deﬁnition A Amplitude of bending force stimulus in millinewtons AP Action potential CS Campaniform sensillum/sensilla FTi Femur-tibia joint GA Genetic algorithm MAE Mean absolute error N Number of individual animals used in an experiment n Number of total trials conducted for an experiment T Duration of ramp phase of bending force stimulus in seconds u Stimulus force applied to the tibia in millinewtons x Model’s dynamic variable y Model discharge in APs per second t is time, k is a constant exponent, and a is a con- stant multiplier (Thorson and Biederman-Thorson 1974, French and T orkkeli 2008). This is surprising because it suggests underlying dynamics quite dif- ferent from typical engineered systems. For example, many engineered control systems cause adaptation according to an exponential function over time, e.g. y = a· exp ( −t/τ ) which is the solution to a linear ﬁrst-order differential equation with time constantτ . However, the power-law adaptation y = a· tk is the solution to a kth-order differential equation, that is, a system whose dynamics include fractional (i.e. non- integer) derivatives of its states (French 1984). While such an insight is a valuable description, it is not clear what chemical, electrical, or mechanical mechanism may compute the fractional derivative of a stimu- lus (Thorson and Biederman-Thorson 1974, Di Paola et al 2013). One motivation for the present study is to formulate an integer-order dynamical model that also produces power-law decay over time. An integer- order model may have more intuitive physical mean- ing and be simpler to implement for simulation or data ﬁltering on board a robot. Here we describe and analyze a nonlinear model that does not rely on fractional derivatives to pro- duce power-law adaptation over time. Conceptually, the model is simple: the discharge frequency is pro- portional to the stimulus force, relative to a nonlin- ear adaptive variable (see table 1 for a list of variables and their meanings). This nonlinear formulation does not allow the application of linear analysis, which is possible for fractional derivative formulations (Chap- man and Smith 1963). However, since it is a ﬁrst order (i.e. not fractional order) system, its dynamics could describe several neural or mechanical phenomena, such as slow sodium channel inactivation in recep- tor cells (T orkkeli and French 2002) or the viscoelas- tic straining of body tissues (Brown and Stein 1966, Hillerton 1984). Furthermore, our analysis directly links the form of power-law adaptation to the struc- ture of the model, such that the model parameters dictate the shape of the responses. However, despite the similarity to multiple adaptive mechanisms, the model is phenomenological in that it reproduces the input-output relationship of CS afferents without speciﬁcally modeling any pa rticular mechanism(s). The advantages of such an a bstract, phenomenolog- ical model is its compactness and computational efﬁ- ciency, which facilitate its integration within a multi- scale model of the motor system (Markin et al 2016, Prilutsky et al 2016, Goldsmith et al 2020,S a n d b r i n k et al 2020, Dallmann et al 2021). In this manuscript we show that our simple phe- nomenological model reproduces the responses of cockroach and stick insect tibial CS with minimal parameter tuning. W e show that all dynamic response properties, i.e. adaptation, rate-sensitivity, and hys- teresis, emerge from the model’s one basic under- lying mechanism: comput ing the discharge as the instantaneous load relative to a dynamic adapting variable. W e derive the ﬁrst-order, nonlinear system that produces power-law adaptation. W e show how such a model approximates rate-sensitivity, indicat- ing that the adaptation and rate-sensitivity are linked. If we eliminate the adapting variable, then hystere- sis disappears, demonstrating that the adapting vari- able and hysteresis are linked. Having established the model’s gross response properties, we then show that the model can reproduce CS discharges in response to highly dynamic force stimuli which it has not been tuned to reproduce. W e show that the model can be inverted, enabling the estimation of highly dynamic forces acting on the leg based on CS afferent recording alone. Throughout the study, we compare the model’s accuracy to a fractional-derivative model and show that the former replicates discharge more accurately than the latter in most of the cases tested. In the dis- cussion, we relate our model to previous models, dis- cuss our model’s applications to CS and other sensory systems, and discuss its application to simulation and robotics. 2. Methods 2.1. Recordings of campaniform sensilla discharge Sensory discharges from the tibial CS of the American cockroach ( Periplaneta americana )a n dI n d i a ns t i c k 3 Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 (2021) 065001 N S Szczecinski et al Ta b le 2 .Parameter values used in this study. V alues for the cockroach proximal tibial group were calculated by minimizing the mean squared error between the response to the ramp-and-hold stimulus depicted in ﬁgure 3(a) and the model’s response to the same stimulus. V alues for the stick insect group 6A were found by minimizing the mean squared error between the recorded 6A discharge depicted in ﬁgure 7(a) and the model’s response to the same stimulus. V alues for the stick insect group 6B were found by minimizing the mean squared error between the recorded 6B discharge depicted in ﬁgure 7(b) and the model’s response to the same stimulus. Group Cockroach Stick insect Stick insect Prox. tibia 6A 6B Amplitude of adaptive term, a (Hz mN−1) 707.6 265.0 605.0 Exponent of adaptive term, b (unitless) 2.262 1.675 3.325 Amplitude of proportional term, c (Hz mN−1) 54.29 17.75 5.750 Amplitude of bias term, d (Hz) −41.16 −22.50 10.50 Amplitude of adaptive time constant, τ (ms) 3.859 9.678 1.659 Figures using this instance of the model 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 6, 10 6, 7, 9, 10 Model tuned using single trial from ﬁgure 3(a) 7(a) 7(b) insect (Carausius morosus) were recorded extracellu- larly. Methods for recording from the CS have been described in detail (cockroach: (Ridgel et al 2000); stick insect: (Zill et al 2011)) and are brieﬂy described below (ﬁgures 1(b) and (c)). For both species, the abdomen, thorax, and proximal leg segments of each animal were restrained by staples. The femur-tibia (FTi) joint was paralyzed by cutting the nerves that supply the femoral muscles. A pin was placed adja- cent to proximal end of the tibia and a small drop of cyanoacrylate glue was applied to link the pin and tibia and prevent rotation. The pin was positioned such that the tibial CS were distal to this anchor point. CS normally respond to loads that are resisted by muscle contractions. In the experimental arrange- ment, externally imposed forces and moments were counteracted instead by the glued pin. The tarsus was then ablated. Force waveforms generated by an analog to digital interface (Spike 2, Cambridge Elec- tronics) were applied to the distal end of the tibia by a probe actuated by a DC motor. The resultant forces were measured via strain gauges within the probe. T o extracellularly record APs from CS afferents, silver wires were inserted in the femur near nerves that carry afferents from the tibial CS. APs were identi- ﬁed in recordings based on thresholding and treated as discrete events. The source of each AP (i.e. which CS group) was determined by AP amplitude, direct cap stimulation, and cap ablation (Ridgel et al 2000). A continuous discharge rate (AP/s) was calculated by counting the number of AP events that took place within a moving window of time (typically 20 ms). 2.2. Features of campaniform sensilla discharge CS discharge is highly dynamic and reﬂects mul- tiple features of the stimulus force. The plots in ﬁgures 1(d)–(g) summarize characterization of CS discharge dynamics reported in (Ridgelet al 2000). CS discharge in response to a tonic stimulus is propor- tional to the amplitude of the stimulus (ﬁgure 1(d)). When the stimulus level changes, the discharge adapts to the new level of force according to a power- law function of time (i.e. the discharge y (t) ∝ tk2 , ﬁgure 1(e)). CS discharge in response to a phasic stimulus reﬂects the rate of change of the stimu- lus according to a power-law relationship (i.e. the discharge y ∝ (du dt )k1 ,w h e r eu is the stimulus force and k1 is the slope of the line of best ﬁt on loga- rithmic axes, ﬁgure 1(f)). Finally, the discharge in response to a stimulus depends on whether the stim- ulus increased or decreased to that level (ﬁgure 1(g)). CS responses to these simple stimuli (i.e. ramp-and- hold) were used to produce a dynamic, phenomeno- logical model of CS discharge that captures responses to highly dynamic stimuli and can be inverted to predict what forces cause recorded CS discharge patterns. 2.3. Dynamic phenomenological model of campaniform sensilla discharge Considering the features of CS discharge described in the previous section, a continuous dynamical descrip- tion of the discharge rate, y, was formulated. Because y represents a ﬁring rate, it must be positive. When subjected to a tonic stimulus, y is proportional to the stimulus force u plus a constant bias (Ridgel et al 2000,Z i l let al 2011), meaning that y should include c· u+ d,w h e r e c and d are constant parameters. Finally, it is known that y reﬂects ˙u,t h er a t eo fc h a n g e of u; y adapts to tonic u according to a power-law function over time; andy exhibits hysteresis asu oscil- lates. W e hypothesized that all three of these features, i.e. rate-sensitivity, power-law adaptation, and hys- teresis, would emerge from a single term in the model, a· (u− x). This term is the difference between the stimulus u and a slowly adapting variable, x.T h e resulting model is: y = max (0, a· (u− x)+ c· u+ d) (1) τ · ˙x = f (u− x) ,( 2 ) where a, c, d,a n d τ are constant parameters (see table 2)a n df is a scalar valued function that increases 4 Bioinspir. Biomim. 16 (2021) 065001 N S Szczecinski et al Figure 2. Basic behavior of the model. (a) The model response can be described by three key ideas: x follows the value of u,a l b e i t by a nonlinear function; y peaks while u is increasing, approximating the rate of change of u;a n dy adapts to 0 when u is constant. (b) The steady-state response of x is a time-delayed version of u when u is a ramp function. The input ramp, u(t),