fnins-15-720542 July 22, 2021 Time: 16:58 # 1 REVIEW published: 28 July 2021 doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.720542 Edited by: Karen Minassian, Medical University of Vienna, Austria Reviewed by: Kimberly J. Dougherty, Drexel University, United States Michael James MacLellan, University of Prince Edward Island, Canada *Correspondence: Alain Frigon alain.frigon@usherbrooke.ca Specialty section: This article was submitted to Neuroprosthetics, a section of the journal Frontiers in Neuroscience Received: 04 June 2021 Accepted: 08 July 2021 Published: 28 July 2021 Citation: Merlet AN, Harnie J and Frigon A (2021) Inhibition and Facilitation of the Spinal Locomotor Central Pattern Generator and Reﬂex Circuits by Somatosensory Feedback From the Lumbar and Perineal Regions After Spinal Cord Injury. Front. Neurosci. 15:720542. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.720542 Inhibition and Facilitation of the Spinal Locomotor Central Pattern Generator and Reﬂex Circuits by Somatosensory Feedback From the Lumbar and Perineal Regions After Spinal Cord Injury Angèle N. Merlet, Jonathan Harnie and Alain Frigon * Department of Pharmacology-Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Centre de Recherche du CHUS, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada Somatosensory feedback from peripheral receptors dynamically interacts with networks located in the spinal cord and brain to control mammalian locomotion. Although somatosensory feedback from the limbs plays a major role in regulating locomotor output, those from other regions, such as lumbar and perineal areas also shape locomotor activity. In mammals with a complete spinal cord injury, inputs from the lumbar region powerfully inhibit hindlimb locomotion, while those from the perineal region facilitate it. Our recent work in cats with a complete spinal cord injury shows that they also have opposite effects on cutaneous reﬂexes from the foot. Lumbar inputs increase the gain of reﬂexes while those from the perineal region decrease it. The purpose of this review is to discuss how somatosensory feedback from the lumbar and perineal regions modulate the spinal locomotor central pattern generator and reﬂex circuits after spinal cord injury and the possible mechanisms involved. We also discuss how spinal cord injury can lead to a loss of functional speciﬁcity through the abnormal activation of functions by somatosensory feedback, such as the concurrent activation of locomotion and micturition. Lastly, we discuss the potential functions of somatosensory feedback from the lumbar and perineal regions and their potential for promoting motor recovery after spinal cord injury. Keywords: locomotion, somatosensory feedback, perineal, lumbar, spinal cord injury, spinal reﬂexes, cutaneous, micturition INTRODUCTION Terrestrial locomotion in mammals is a complex movement that engages all levels of the nervous system. The basic pattern of locomotion, consisting of ﬂexor and extensor alternation in one limb and left-right alternation, is generated at the level of the spinal cord by a network of neurons, the so-called central pattern generator (CPG) (reviewed in Grillner, 1981; Rossignol et al., 2006; McCrea and Rybak, 2008; Kiehn, 2016; Frigon, 2017; Grillner and El Manira, 2020). The spinal locomotor CPG receives inputs from peripheral mechanoreceptors located in muscles, tendons, Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720542 fnins-15-720542 July 22, 2021 Time: 16:58 # 2 Merlet et al. Modulation of Spinal Network joints and skin, collectively termed somatosensory feedback, as well as from various supraspinal structures. Somatosensory feedback provides information related to the internal state of the body (proprioceptive) and external physical conditions (tactile). Supraspinal structures also receive somatosensory feedback and inputs related to vision, body orientation (vestibular) and cognitive processes. Locomotion is generated through the complex interplay between these control systems. Complete spinal cord injury (SCI), such as a spinal transection, permanently abolishes all communication between the brain and spinal networks controlling leg movements. However, because of the spinal locomotor CPG and its interactions with somatosensory inputs, various sensorimotor functions recover, such as spinal reﬂexes and locomotion, in various mammals, such as mice, rats and cats, and even humans but to a lesser degree (Rossignol and Frigon, 2011). Even more remarkable, cats with a spinal transection (i.e., spinal cats) can adjust to treadmill speed (Hurteau et al., 2017; Harnie et al., 2018, 2019), left-right speed diﬀerences on a split-belt treadmill (Frigon et al., 2017; Kuczynski et al., 2017), stepping on an incline (Higgin et al., 2020) and stepping backward when the treadmill is reversed (Harnie et al., 2021). Although somatosensory feedback from the limbs shapes the output of the spinal locomotor CPG, inputs from other body regions also generate powerful inhibition or facilitation of locomotion. For instance, inputs from the lumbar skin inhibit hindlimb locomotion (Viala and Buser, 1974; Viala et al., 1978; Frigon et al., 2012b; Hurteau et al., 2015; Merlet et al., 2020), while inputs from the skin of the perineal region facilitate it (Barbeau and Rossignol, 1987; Belanger et al., 1996; Leblond et al., 2003; Langlet et al., 2005; Hochman, 2012; Alluin et al., 2015; Harnie et al., 2019). Our recent work in chronic spinal cats shows that somatosensory inputs from the lumbar and perineal regions, respectively, increase and decrease the gain of cutaneous reﬂexes from the foot (Merlet et al., 2020, 2021). Thus, lumbar and perineal inputs have opposite eﬀects on reﬂexes, weight support and locomotor activity. The purpose of this review is to discuss how somatosensory feedback from the lumbar and perineal regions modulate the spinal locomotor central pattern generator and reﬂex circuits, the possible mechanisms involved and their potential functions. We also discuss the loss of functional speciﬁcity in response to somatosensory feedback after SCI. We ﬁnish by discussing the functional roles of somatosensory feedback from lumbar and perineal regions and its potential to promote the recovery of motor functions after SCI. SOMATOSENSORY FEEDBACK INHIBITS OR FACILITATES HINDLIMB LOCOMOTION During locomotion, somatosensory feedback from receptors located in muscles, joints, and skin of the limbs interacts dynamically with the spinal locomotor CPG to regulate phase durations and transitions as well as to change the magnitude of muscle activity to meet task demands (reviewed in Duysens et al., 2000; Dietz, 2002; Rossignol et al., 2006; Pearson, 2008). For example, electrically stimulating the ankle extensor nerve at group I strength resets the rhythm from ﬂexion to extension or prolongs the ongoing extensor burst during ﬁctive locomotion in decerebrate cats (Conway et al., 1987; Gossard et al., 1994; Guertin et al., 1995; Schomburg et al., 1998; Frigon et al., 2010). Simulating ﬂexor muscle aﬀerents and cutaneous aﬀerents from the foot also resets or entrains the ﬁctive locomotor rhythm (Duysens, 1977; Guertin et al., 1995; Perreault et al., 1995; Schomburg et al., 1998; Lam and Pearson, 2001; Stecina et al., 2005; Frigon et al., 2010). Resetting and entraining the locomotor rhythm suggest that inputs have direct access to spinal rhythm- generating circuitry (Conway et al., 1987; Hultborn et al., 1998; Schomburg et al., 1998; McCrea and Rybak, 2008; Pearson, 2008; Gossard et al., 2011; Frigon et al., 2012b). In humans, somatosensory feedback from the limbs also interacts with spinal networks (reviewed in Duysens et al., 2000; Dietz, 2002). For example, aﬀerents that signal hip-joint position are critical for H-reﬂex modulation at various hip angles (Chapman et al., 1991; Brooke et al., 1993; Knikou and Rymer, 2002b), and for switching reﬂex actions from inhibitory to facilitatory (Knikou and Rymer, 2002a). Although somatosensory inputs from the limbs plays a major role in regulating the locomotor rhythm, those from the lumbar and perineal regions also interact with the spinal locomotor CPG to shape locomotor activity. Inhibition of the Spinal Locomotor CPG With Mechanical Stimulation of the Lumbar Region Studies in rabbits and cats have shown that activating mechanoreceptors of the lumbar region inhibits spinal neuronal circuits that generate weight support and locomotion (Viala and Buser, 1974; Viala et al., 1978; Frigon et al., 2012b; Hurteau et al., 2015; Merlet et al., 2020). In curarized decerebrate rabbits with intact or transected spinal cords, mechanical or selective electrical stimulation of a dorsal lumbosacral cutaneous nerve, at an intensity that recruits A δ ﬁbers, instantly abolished ﬁctive locomotor-like activity (Viala and Buser, 1974; Viala et al., 1978). More recently, it was shown that pinching the lumbar skin abolished locomotor-like activity during terminal experiments in chronic spinal decerebrate cats treated with clonidine, an α2-noradrenergic agonist known to facilitate hindlimb locomotion or locomotor-like activity in spinal cats (Frigon et al., 2012b). In this study, however, the hindlimbs were restrained. Pinching the lumbar skin resets the locomotor- like rhythm to ﬂexion and maintained it in ﬂexion. In another study in awake chronic spinal cats not treated pharmacologically, also with the hindlimbs restrained, mechanically stimulating the lumbar region with vibration or manual pinch abolished locomotor-like activity initiated by electrically stimulating the superﬁcial peroneal or distal tibial nerve (Merlet et al., 2020). During treadmill locomotion, pinching the lumbar skin abolished weight support and hindlimb movements in chronic spinal cats (Hurteau et al., 2015). In rabbits and cats, the powerful inhibitory eﬀect persists as long as the mechanical stimulation is applied. In humans, the inhibitory mechanism from the dorsal lumbar region to spinal locomotor networks appears to have Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720542 fnins-15-720542 July 22, 2021 Time: 16:58 # 3 Merlet et al. Modulation of Spinal Network been conserved because pinching the lumbar skin in a subject with a motor complete SCI abolished spontaneous involuntary rhythmic activity (Nadeau et al., 2010). The most consistent inhibitory eﬀects were observed with cutaneous stimulation centered at mid lumbar levels, from L2 to L5 in rabbits and cats (Viala and Buser, 1974; Hurteau et al., 2015). The area of eﬀective stimulus is large in rabbits (> 0.3 cm2) (Viala and Buser, 1974) and cats ( > 1 cm 2) (Hurteau et al., 2015). In rabbits, the inhibitory eﬀect was attributed to the activation of A δ ﬁbers from the lumbosacral skin (Viala et al., 1978). This study performed two experiments where they 1) recruited diﬀerent groups of ﬁbers through a progressive increase in electrical stimulation intensity and 2) isolated selective groups of ﬁbers (Viala et al., 1978). In both experiments, the activation of A δ ﬁbers was clearly inhibitory whereas the activation of other aﬀerents was moderately (A α, A β) or strongly (C ﬁbers) excitatory (Viala et al., 1978). However, a slight pressure to the lumbar region was suﬃcient to reduce weight support in chronic spinal cats (Hurteau et al., 2015), indicating the involvement of non-nociceptive aﬀerents from low-threshold mechanoreceptors in the inhibition. Thus, it is possible that Aα and Aβ ﬁbers are also involved. Moreover, although the majority of A δ ﬁbers are high threshold nociceptive aﬀerents, a subset of these ﬁbers responds to non-nociceptive low threshold stimuli (Abraira and Ginty, 2013). After removing the skin, applying pressure to a spinous process also blocked locomotion, consistent with the involvement of inputs other than cutaneous in the inhibition of the spinal locomotor circuitry (Viala et al., 1978). Thus, at present, we cannot conﬁrm with certainty the type of aﬀerents involved in the inhibition of weight bearing and hindlimb locomotion with stimulation of the lumbar region. Additionally, a systematic investigation is required to determine the dermatomes and somatosensory aﬀerent types with potential inhibitory actions on rhythmic activity in humans. Facilitation of the Spinal Locomotor CPG With Mechanical Stimulation of the Perineal Region Stimulation of the skin of the perineal region (scrotum, vulva, base of tail and inguinal fold) facilitates hindlimb locomotion and weight support in spinal mammals. For decades, researchers have used perineal stimulation to initiate ﬁctive locomotion in acute spinal decerebrate curarized preparations treated with clonidine or L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA) (Forssberg and Grillner, 1973; Pearson and Rossignol, 1991; Pearson et al., 1992; McCrea et al., 1995; Bennett et al., 1996) and to facilitate or reinforce hindlimb locomotion in chronic spinal mammals (Barbeau and Rossignol, 1987; Belanger et al., 1996; Leblond et al., 2003; Langlet et al., 2005; Hochman, 2012; Alluin et al., 2015; Harnie et al., 2019). However, the increase of spinal neuronal excitability is mediated by an undeﬁned mechanism (Pearson and Rossignol, 1991; Harnie et al., 2019). We recently showed, in chronic spinal cats with the hindlimbs restrained, that stimulating the perineal region with vibration or pinch facilitated or triggered rhythmic locomotor-like activity (Merlet et al., 2021). In this study, a base rhythm was initiated by electrically stimulating the superﬁcial peroneal and distal tibial nerves at 0.5 Hz. The electrical stimuli initiated ﬂexor bursts approximately every 2 s and extensor bursts occurred spontaneously and were terminated by the next electrical stimulus. Thus, electrical stimulation initiated and entrained the rhythm. The addition of mechanical stimulation (pinch or vibration) of the perineal region signiﬁcantly modulated the rhythmic activity initiated by the electrical nerve stimulation by increasing the frequency and amplitude of bursts in hindlimb muscles. It also disrupted the entrainment of the rhythm by the electrical stimuli by reducing cycle duration, possibly imposing its own entrainment. After stopping perineal stimulation, the electrical nerve stimulation resumed entraining the rhythm. Although perineal stimulation improves locomotor performance in chronic spinal cats with weak locomotor activity, it has a negligible or even detrimental eﬀect on cats with an already robust locomotor pattern (Harnie et al., 2019). Indeed, in spinal cats with a robust hindlimb locomotion, perineal stimulation disrupts the pattern, producing exaggerated ﬂexion or extension movements and improper left- right alternation. In other words, too much excitability to the spinal locomotor CPG is detrimental. What type of aﬀerent ﬁbers mediate the facilitatory eﬀect from the perineal region? The skin and muscles around the perineal region are innervated by the pudendal nerve inserting at the level of the second, third and fourth sacral roots (Martin et al., 1974). To our knowledge, no studies have determined the type of cutaneous ﬁbers that mediate the excitatory eﬀect on the spinal locomotor CPG. However, stimulating nociceptive or non-nociceptive sacral aﬀerents is known to evoke ﬁctive locomotor-like activity in isolated spinal cord preparations of neonatal mouse and rats (Lev-Tov et al., 2000; Strauss and Lev- Tov, 2003; Etlin et al., 2013; Mandadi et al., 2013). Thus, it is likely that low- and high-threshold aﬀerents from the perineal region facilitate hindlimb locomotion. SOMATOSENSORY FEEDBACK FROM LUMBAR AND PERINEAL REGIONS, RESPECTIVELY, INCREASE AND DECREASE REFLEX GAIN One approach to determine how inputs from the lumbar and perineal regions aﬀect spinal sensorimotor circuits is to evoke reﬂexes while applying mechanical stimulation to the lumbar or perineal regions. One study showed that somatosensory feedback from the lumbar skin altered responses to stretch of the triceps surae muscles in decerebrate spinal cats treated with clonidine where the hindlimbs were restrained (Frigon et al., 2012b). A 2.5 s ramp-and-hold stretch evoked locomotor-like bursts in extensor and ﬂexor muscles bilaterally that continued after the stretch. The same stretch applied while pinching the lumbar skin mainly produced a large sustained activity in the ipsilateral semitendinosus, a muscle not stretched, with no activity in the ipsilateral soleus. Recently, we investigated the modulation of cutaneous reﬂexes from the foot by stimulating the lumbar (Merlet et al., 2020) Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2021 | Volume 15 | Article 720542 fnins-15-720542 July 22, 2021 Time: 16:58 # 4 Merlet et al. Modulation of Spinal Network and perineal (Merlet et al., 2021) regions in chronic spinal cats with the hindlimbs restrained. These cats did not receive a pharmacological treatment. To evoke cutaneous reﬂexes, we electrically stimulated (trains of 3 pulses at 300 Hz every 2 s) the superﬁcial peroneal and distal tibial nerves at ankle level and recorded responses in ipsilateral and contralateral muscles. We showed that mechanically stimulating the lumbar region with vibration or pinch increased ipsilateral and crossed short- latency excitatory cutaneous reﬂex responses while perineal stimulation, in contrast, decreased reﬂex responses. In other words, stimulating the lumbar region inhibits locomotor and weight bearing activity but increases reﬂex gain while perineal stimulation produces an opposite eﬀect, facilitation of locomotion and weight bearing while reducing reﬂex gain. Interestingly, perineal stimulation could also change the type of reﬂex response evoked by nerve stimulations, from positive to negative responses. Figure 1 illustrates the main eﬀects of mechanically stimulating the lumbar and perineal regions on rhythmic activity and on electrically evoked cutaneous reﬂexes in hindlimb muscles of chronic spinal cats with the hindlimbs restrained. MECHANISMS INVOLVED IN MODULATING SPINAL LOCOMOTOR CPG ACTIVITY AND CUTANEOUS REFLEXES How do inputs from the lumbar and perineal regions inhibit or facilitate hindlimb locomotion? In contrast to stimulating the lumbar region, inputs from the perineal region do not reset the rhythm to ﬂexion or extension. Instead, perineal inputs appear to boost the overall excitability of the network generating locomotion by increasing the magnitude of muscle activity and the cadence. Let us explain these results by considering that the spinal locomotor CPG is separated in two levels, rhythm generation and pattern formation, a concept originally proposed by Perret et al. (1988) [see McCrea and Rybak (2008) for a review and discussion]. In this organization, the rhythm generator sets the timing (i.e., the clock function) while the pattern formation layer controls motoneuron activations. As inputs from the lumbar skin often reset the rhythm to ﬂexion, this is generally taken as evidence that signals have direct access to the rhythm generator (Hultborn et al., 1998; McCrea and Rybak, 2008; Pearson, 2008; Gossard et al., 2011; Frigon, 2012). On the other hand, inputs from the perineal region do not reset the rhythm. Instead, they increase the magnitude of muscle activity with a slight increase in cadence. Thus, inputs from the perineal region would primarily access the pattern formation level with weak to no eﬀects on the rhythm generator, as the pattern formation level also has some rhythmogenic capabilities (McCrea and Rybak, 2008). Where do sensory inputs from the lumbar and perineal regions project to in the spinal cord in relation to the neuronal circuits involved in locomotion? In the cat, lumbar skin aﬀerents project to segments L4 and L5 (Kuhn, 1953). These spinal segments contain motoneuron pools that innervate hip ﬂexors (e.g., iliopsoas and sartorius), the quadriceps, as well as hip adductors (Vanderhorst and Holstege, 19