=== KMATJMI4 | Peripheral control of the cat's step cycle. II. Entrainment of the central pattern generators for locomotion by sinusoidal hip movements during "fictive locomotion.". | doi=10.1111/j.1748-1716.1983.tb07267.x ===
TITLE: Peripheral control of the cat's step cycle. II. Entrainment of the central pattern generators for locomotion by sinusoidal hip movements during "fictive locomotion.".
AUTHORS: Olof Andersson; Andersson; Sten Grillner; Grillner
ITEMTYPE: journalArticle  YEAR: 1983-07-01
JOURNAL: Acta Physiologica Scandinavica

[ABSTRACT - Zotero local]
Acute low spinal and curarized cats injected with noradrenergic agonists i.v. can elicit an efferent burst pattern which can be recorded in muscle nerve filaments and can be referred to as “fictive locomotion”. This study investigates the effect that feedback, arising from movements in the hip joint, can exert on the central network generating fictive locomotion. The central network is uncoupled from generating any active movements by curarization. The motor pattern could be entrained by applying sinusoidal hip movements, even when a very extensive denervation of the leg had been performed leaving only some of the muscles around the hip and the hip joint innervated. During flexion movements, efferents to different flexor muscles became active and during movements in the reverse direction (extension), efferents to extensors were active. With an increasing movement frequency the onsets of both flexor and extensor bursts were delayed in the movement cycle. The duration of the extensor bursts varied markedly with the movement cycle, whereas pure flexors changed less in burst duration. The frequency range within which the efferent burst activity was entrained in a strict 1:1 relation to the movement varied between 5 to 70% above and below the resting burst period. In preparations with a narrow 1:1 range, a “relative coordination” was encountered outside this range. The flexor burst duration was in these cases dependent on where in the hip movement cycle the bursts appeared.

[SOURCES: zot-local-abs]