The circuitry required for generating vertebrate locomotion resides in the spinal cord and is called the locomotor central pattern generator (CPG).1, 2 The locomotor CPG is present at birth in both mouse and rat3. The rodent neonatal spinal cord can be isolated and maintained in vitro4 and, in the presence of bath-applied neuroactive substances, this preparation produces a motor pattern consistent with locomotion as recorded from ventral roots, peripheral nerves, or hind limb muscles.5

Studies in the intact animal indicate that sensory cues related to limb posture and loading play significant roles in determining the spatiotemporal features of motor output.6, 7 Sensory feedback particularly regulates the timing of flexor8, 9 and amplitude of extensor activation.10, 11 Despite the overwhelming importance of sensory feedback to locomotor function, many studies on spinal sensorimotor circuitry are performed in the absence of intact feedback. In order to provide greater similarity to adult locomotion using in vitro preparations, we recently developed a novel preparation – the in vitro neonatal rat spinal cord with hind limbs intact and pendant (SCHIP). This preparation couples natural sensory feedback and behavioral observability with the neural accessibility of the classic in vitro preparations.12 The spinal cord is positioned dorsal-up so that stepping can be activated by bath application of neurochemicals (Fig 1D-E) to generate coordinated muscle activity patterns with limb kinematics that compare well to what is seen in the adult.12-16



Figure 1

DRPs as measures of primary afferent depolarization and experimental setup. (A) GABA release activates GABAA receptors on intraspinal primary afferent terminals. Afferents possess a high intracellular chloride gradient, leading to chloride efflux. This ...



We have since incorporated ventral and dorsal root recordings as well as intracellular recordings to relate neural function and behavior in ways not typically possible in vitro.17 A particularly exciting observation regarding afferent feedback concerned the control of transmission in contralateral afferents by a distinctive form of presynaptic inhibition (PSI) called primary afferent depolarization (PAD).18 Such contralateral interlimb control of sensory transmission is barely studied and consequently poorly understood. Yet the magnitude of PAD observed suggests that these control mechanisms are profound.18

Here, we first review the role of afferent feedback on the regulation of ongoing locomotion, with subsequent emphasis on afferent PAD-mediated PSI (PAD-PSI). We then present our previously reported results and provide some additional data on a powerful contralateral afferent evoked PAD-PSI during locomotion. Overall, contralateral stance-phase force feedback may prove to be the most pivotal mechanosensory event encoding sensory gain into the swinging limb during an alternating locomotor gait.
