1. J Neurophysiol. 2015 Jan 15;113(2):669-76. doi: 10.1152/jn.00739.2014. Epub
2014  Oct 22.

Effect of stimulating the lumbar skin caudal to a complete spinal cord injury on 
hindlimb locomotion.

Hurteau MF(1), Thibaudier Y(1), Dambreville C(1), Desaulniers C(1), Frigon A(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Physiology and 
Biophysics, Centre de recherche du CHUS, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 
Quebec, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department of Physiology and 
Biophysics, Centre de recherche du CHUS, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, 
Quebec, Canada alain.frigon@usherbrooke.ca.

Sensory feedback is a potent modulator of the locomotor pattern generated by 
spinal networks. The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of cutaneous 
inputs from the back on the spinal-generated locomotor pattern. The spinal cord 
of six adult cats was transected at low thoracic levels. Cats were then trained 
to recover hindlimb locomotion. During experiments, the skin overlying lumbar 
vertebrae L2 to L7 was mechanically stimulated by a small calibrated clip or by 
manual pinching. Trials without and with cutaneous stimulation were performed at 
a treadmill speed of 0.4 m/s. Although manually pinching the skin completely 
stopped hindlimb locomotion and abolished weight support, cutaneous stimulation 
with the calibrated clip produced smaller effects. Specifically, more focalized 
cutaneous stimulation with the clip reduced flexor and extensor muscle activity 
and led to a more caudal positioning of the paw at contact and liftoff. 
Moreover, cutaneous stimulation with the clip led to a greater number of steps 
with improper nonplantigrade paw placements at contact and paw drag at the 
stance-to-swing transition. The most consistent effects on the hindlimb 
locomotor pattern were observed with cutaneous stimulation at midlumbar levels, 
from L3 to L5. The results indicate that cutaneous stimulation of the skin 
modulates the excitability of spinal circuits involved in generating locomotion 
and weight support, particularly at spinal segments thought to be critical for 
rhythm generation.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00739.2014
PMID: 25339715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]