1. J Neurophysiol. 2018 Aug 1;120(2):497-508. doi: 10.1152/jn.00486.2017. Epub
2018  Apr 18.

Stepping responses to treadmill perturbations vary with severity of motor 
deficits in human SCI.

Chu VWT(1), Hornby TG(1)(2), Schmit BD(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Sensory Motor Performance Program, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago , 
Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, 
Illinois.
(3)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Marquette University , Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin.

In this study, we investigated the responses to tread perturbations during human 
stepping on a treadmill. Our approach was to test the effects of perturbations 
to a single leg using a split-belt treadmill in healthy participants and in 
participants with varying severity of spinal cord injury (SCI). We recruited 11 
people with incomplete SCI and 5 noninjured participants. As participants walked 
on an instrumented treadmill, the belt on one side was stopped or accelerated 
briefly during midstance to late stance. A majority of participants initiated an 
unnecessary swing when the treadmill was stopped in midstance, although the 
likelihood of initiating a step was decreased in participants with more severe 
SCI. Accelerating or decelerating one belt of the treadmill during stance 
altered the characteristics of swing. We observed delayed swing initiation when 
the belt was decelerated (i.e., the hip was in a more flexed position at time of 
swing) and advanced swing initiation with acceleration (i.e., hip extended at 
swing initiation). Furthermore, the timing and leg posture of heel strike 
appeared to remain constant, reflected by a sagittal plane hip angle at heel 
strike that remained the same regardless of the perturbation. In summary, our 
results supported the current understanding of the role of sensory feedback and 
central drive in the control of stepping in participants with incomplete SCI and 
noninjured participants. In particular, the observation of unnecessary swing 
during a stop perturbation highlights the interdependence of central and sensory 
drive in walking control. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Using a novel approach with a 
split-belt treadmill, we tested the effects of hip angle perturbations to a 
single leg in healthy participants and participants with varying severity of 
spinal cord injury (SCI). A majority of participants initiated an unnecessary 
swing when the treadmill was stopped in midstance, although the likelihood of 
initiating a step decreased with the severity of SCI. Our results demonstrated 
interdependence of central and sensory drive in walking control.

DOI: 10.1152/jn.00486.2017
PMCID: PMC6139440
PMID: 29668389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]