, E. W. & oo J. (1939). The dynamics of the frog and turtle hearts. Amer. J. 
Physiol. 128, 709-715. 


4 
4 
¥ 
1 
f 
oa 
~ 
5 
> 
4 
a 
» 
q 
‘ 
‘ 
> ¢ 
2 
g 


J. Physiol. (1957) 137, 22-50 


THE CONVERGENCE OF MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATORY 
AFFERENTS ON TO MANY DIFFERENT SPECIES 
OF ALPHA MOTONEURONES 


By J. C. ECCLES, ROSAMOND M. ECCLES anp A. LUNDBERG 
From The Physiology Department, Australian National University, Canberra 


(Received 14 January 1957) 


The manner in which the contractions of diffgfent muscles are co-ordinated 
to give movements and postures was first intengively investigated by Sherring- 
ton. Initially he studied the limb movements produced by tetanic stimulation 
of various afferent nerves and pointed out that ‘reflex action by its spread, 
develops a combined movement, synthesises a harmony’ (Sherrington, 1898). 
In a later, more precise analysis he studied the responses of the individual 
muscles and compiled lists both of those muscles which contracted in the 
flexor reflexes evoked by a standard test stimulus and of those muscles that 
relaxed (Sherrington, 1910). All members of the former class caused flexion of 
one or other joint of the limb and may be regarded functionally as flexor 
muscles, Conversely, all members of the latter class caused extension of one 
or more joints of the limb and are functionally extensors. Some muscles of the 
limb did not belong to either class. 

Further investigation (Sherrington, 1910) revealed that virtually the same 
two classes of muscles gave complementary responses in such other types of 
reflex action as the crossed extensor reflex and the flexor and extensor phases 
of reflex stepping. Thus arose the general concept that all flexor-type muscles 


contracted together in reflexes and hence were synergists, as also with all 


extensor-type muscles. 


The more localized monosynaptic reflexes now give opportunity for study , 


of more restricted functional relationships between motoneurones supplying 


one or another functional group of muscles in a limb, i.e. for a more restricted 


synergism. Although the monosynaptic activation of motoneurones by 


impulses in the afferent fibres from the annulo-spiral endings of muscle 
spindles (the group Ia afferent fibres) has been extensively investigated since it 


was first discovered by Lloyd (19434, 6), no systematic survey has been meade 


of the receptor field from which the motoneurone belonging to any particular 


22 
muse 
q be re 
to re 
(Lioy 
empl 
| was 
i.e. 
whol 
syna 
home 
} thro 
desc1 
follo 
q two 
brev 
long 
syne 
4 
(Bre 
inves 
imp 
rece] 
syna 
4 fron 
wid 
app 
syle 
the 
q in t 
large 
whic 
| signi 
Dise 
The 
was 
Wins 
ot 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 23 


muscle draws its monosynaptic innervation. Initially the field was thought to 
be restricted to receptors in that muscle, i.e. to be purely homonymous, or even’ 
to receptors in that fraction of the muscle innervated by the motoneurone 
(Lloyd, 19434, 6), for the generation of a reflex discharge was the sole criterion 
employed. When monosynaptic facilitatory action was recognized, the field 
was extended to include other muscles acting synergically at the same joint, 
i.e. to be also heteronymous (Eccles, 1946; Lloyd, 1946a, b). For example, the 
whole gastrocnemius-soleus muscle provided the receptor field for mono- 
synaptic activation of any gastrocnemius-soleus motoneurone. These terms, 
homonymous and heteronymous, will be used in this precise connotation 
throughout this paper. The most extensive survey of facilitation between 
nerves to various synergic muscles was made by Laporte & Lloyd (1952), who 
described monosynaptic facilitatory action for afferent volleys in nerves to the 
following synergic pairs of muscles; soleus and gastrocnemius medialis; the 
two heads of flexor digitorum longus; plantaris and flexor digitorum longus or 
brevis; biceps femoris posterior and semitendinosus; extensor digitorum 
longus and tibialis anterior. However, in practice this method of studying 
synergism was cumbersome and no attempt was made to give a quantitative 
evaluation. 

The new technique of intracellular recording of synaptic excitatory action 
(Brock, Coombs & Eccles, 1952) gives a much more favourable opportunity for 
investigating either the pattern of monosynaptic excitatory action exerted by 
impulses from the annulo-spiral endings of any muscle, or alternatively the 
receptor field from which any particular class of motoneurone draws its mono- 
synaptic innervation. The present paper describes an investigation of the mono- 
synaptic excitatory post-synaptic potentials (EPSP’s) recorded intracellularly 
from over 400 motoneurones that were activated by afferent volleys from a 
wide variety of muscle nerves. It has in this way been possible to give an 
approximately quantitative evaluation of the receptor fields for the mono- 
synaptic excitation of eighteen different species of motoneurones belonging to 
the hind limb, and of four species of motoneurones supplying elbow extensors 
in the forelimb. The receptor field for any species of motoneurone is very 
largely located in the muscle belonging to that motoneurone and in muscles 
which act synergically at the same joint, but there are notable exceptions. The 
significance of receptor field as a measure of synergism will be considered in the 
Discussion. 

METHODS 
The animals (cats) were under light anaesthesia from pentobarbital sodium and the spinal cord 
was divided in the upper lumbar region. The techniques used for intracellular recording from 
motoneurones have been described in recent papers (Brock ef al. 1952; Eccles, Fatt, Landgren & 
Winsbury, 1954; Coombs, Eccles & Fatt, 1955a). Many of the motor nuclei investigated were 


small; and in order to locate them and, once this was achieved, to find the cells, it was necessary 
‘o track systematically, often for several hours. In this procedure it was of importance not to 


t 
a 
+ 
» 
‘ 
7 
4 
4q 


24 J. C. EOCLES AND OTHERS 


change the micro-electrode and hence to avoid breakage or blockage of the tip. For this purpose it ‘ 
was found to be an advantage to use rather large electrodes with a resistance of about 5 MQ. The | 


technique of superposition of many faint traces has been employed throughout so as to minimize 


disturbances by background noise. In order to make the survey as extensive as possible a large — 


number of muscle nerves (up to 15) was carefully dissected and mounted on stimulating electrodes. 
On insertion of the micro-electrode into a motoneurone it was possible by a rotary switch device to 


identify it as described below and to investigate very quickly the responses evoked by afferent | 


volleys in the whole series of nerves. Special precautions have been taken in order to ensure that 
maximum monosynaptic responses were being evoked by volleys from the various nerves. The 


method of evaluating and allowing for distortions due to potentials generated by other central — 


actions of the muscle nerve volleys will be described later. 


RESULTS 
The identification of motoneurones 


Hitherto, when the responses of single motoneurones were being investigated — 


by recording individually from their axons in the ventral root, a motoneurone 
has been identified as belonging to the muscle whose afferents exercised the 
most powerful monosynaptic excitatory action (Granit & Strém, 1951; Lloyd 
& McIntyre, 1955a, 6; Hunt, 1955). This criterion has been well established 
for the gastrocnemius-soleus motoneurones, for it has been shown that an 
afferent volley in either the lateral or medial branch hardly ever evokes a mono- 
synaptic discharge into the other branch unless it has been potentiated by 
prior tetanization or powerfully facilitated by other excitatory impulses 
(Granit & Strém, 1951; Hunt, 1952; Jefferson & Benson, 1953; Job, 1953; 
Alvord & Fuortes, 1953; Lloyd, Hunt & McIntyre, 1955; Lloyd & McIntyre, 


19555). A similar absence of cross-excitation with the myotatic reflex was — 


reported by Liddell. & Sherrington (1924) for components of the nerve to 
quadriceps muscle, but again cross-excitation between such components has 
been observed (Denny Brown, 1929), particularly during a powerful facilitation 
(Roberts, 1952; Cohen, 1953). Finally Lloyd et al. (1955) found that even in 
the absence of potentiation or facilitation the motoneurones belonging to a 
small branch of the medial gastrocnemius nerve could be excited monosyn- 
aptically by an afferent volley in the remainder of the nerve. 

Certainty in identification requires that the axon of the motoneurone be 


traced to a particular muscle. This is readily accomplished when the responses — 


of a motoneurone are being studied by intracellular recording, for it is necessary 
merely to discover the muscle nerve from which an antidromic impulse can be 
fired up to the motoneurone. This criterion has been uniformly applied in 


determining the species of the motoneurones, over 400 in number, whose — 


responses are described in this paper. 


This method of identification requires that the ventral roots, as well as the : 


dorsal roots, be left intact, and that the various muscle nerves be mounted on 


stimulating electrodes so that each nerve can be stimulated in turn as soon as — 
the micro-electrode is inserted into a motoneurone. It is further necessary to — 


by sy 
EPSP 
5 by 
trials. 
an an 
which 
4 soleus 
4 1957) 
hence 
3 antid 
exam} 
4 soleus 
| of the 
4 and 9 
respor 
examy 
- poten 
the s 
|g 
dendr 
; 1953; 
is nev 
3 are in 
unput 
Oce 
dendr 
4 poten 
3 fied b 
a neuro 
| dendr 
the sa 
supphy 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 2% 


distinguish between spike potentials which are generated in the motoneurone 
by synaptic and by antidromic stimulation. For example in Figs. 1C, 8D 
and 9B the earlier group of spike potentials arose before the onset of the 
EPSP, and so must have been due to impulses propagated antidromically up 
the motor axon, while the later group was generated by synaptic excitation, 
i.e. by the EPSP. The stimulus applied to the muscle nerves had been set just 
at threshold for that motor axon, evoking an impulse in about half of the 
trials. In Figs. 1 7, 8H and 9F a slightly stronger stimulus invariably set up 
an antidromic impulse and produced the typical antidromic spike potential, 
which was recorded at much lower amplification than in the other records. 

With motoneurones belonging to slow-contracting red muscles, notably 
soleus, conduction in the motor axon is so slow (cf. Eccles, Eccles & Lundberg, 
19576) that the antidromic spike potential does not arise before the EPSP; 
hence it is not possible to discriminate, as in Figs. 10, 8D and 9B, between 
antidromic spike potentials and spike potentials generated synaptically. For 
example, in Fig. 7 D the stimulus was just at threshold for the motor axon in the 
soleus nerve and the spike potentials are seen to begin during the rising phase 
of the EPSP, thus resembling the synaptically excited spikes in Figs. 1C, 8D 
and 9B. However, discrimination has always been effected by observing the 
response evoked when a second stimulus was applied to the nerve. For 
example, in Fig. 7P both stimuli were sufficiently strong to evoke a spike 
potential on every test (cf. Fig. 70), but the second stimulus merely evoked 
the small IS spike response (1S stands for initial segment of axon) which is 
characteristic of an antidromic impulse that fails to invade the soma and 
dendrites of a motoneurone to give an SD spike (Brock, Coombs & Eccles, 
1953; Coombs et al, 1955a). Such an IS spike without a subsequent SD spike 
is never generated by synaptic stimulation of motoneurones except when they 
are in a gravely deteriorated state (Coombs, J. 8., Curtis, D. R. & Kecles, J. C., 
unpublished). 

Occasionally a single antidromic impulse fails to invade the soma and 
dendrites of the motoneurone, setting up merely an IS or even an M spike 
potential (Brock et al. 1953; Eccles, 1955). For example, an M spike may he 
seen immediately preceding the EPSP in Figs. 2H and 4C. It is readily identi- 
fied by its latency, time course and all-or-nothing character. With the moto- 
neurone of Fig. 4 the antidromic impulse initially invaded the soma and 
dendrites giving the large spike potential (Fig. 4B), but later blockage de- 
veloped leaving only the small M spike (Fig. 4C) that was evoked at exactly 
the same latent period and at a similar stimulus strength. 

As would be expected, it has not been possible to determine the species of all 
motoneurones by this procedure of antidromic identification, for some would 
supply muscles whose nerves were not mounted for stimulation. However, 
positive identification by the antidromic test has never been in doubt. With 


‘J 
a 
z 
4 
4 


26 J. ©. ECOLES AND OTHERS 


a few motoneurones, spike potentials have been evoked by stimuli applied to : 
more than one muscle nerve, but it has always been possible to show that in all 


but one the spikes were generated synaptically. 


The assessment of the maximum monosynaptic EPSP’s 

When the stimulus applied to a muscle nerve is strong enough to excite all 
the group Ia afferent fibres, and hence to evoke a maximum EPSP, which 
is an essential requirement for the present investigation (cf. Eocies, Eccles & 
Lundberg, 1957), it also will excite other afferent fibres and even some motor 
fibres. Consequently the monosynaptic EPSP will be distorted both by the 
EPSP’s and IPSP’s produced by group Ib and II afferent impulses (Eccles 
et al. 1957a) and by the IPSP that antidromic impulses generate via axon 
collaterals and Renshaw cells (Eccles, Fatt & Koketsu, 1954). Fortunately all 
these distorting potentials have such long latencies that they do not commence 
before the summit of the monosynaptic EPSP. For example, in Fig. 7 F, H, J, 
N an IPSP can be seen cutting into the maximum EPSP just after its summit, 
as may also be seen in Figs. 27, G; 8F; 127, G, H. The maximum value for 
the monosynaptic EPSP may thus be measured directly from such records, 
Occasionally an appreciable extracellular potential is produced by the volley 
from the muscle nerve, particularly if it is antidromically activating moto- 
neurones in ¢lose proximity (cf. Fig. 7H). Extracellular records (cf. Fig. 12 /—K) 
have then usually been taken so that the distortion can be allowed for. 

Measurement of the maximum value for the homonymous EPSP is further 
often complicated by superposition of the antidromic spike potential. The 
threshold of the motor fibres to the slowly contracting red muscles, soleus, 
crureus and the medial head of triceps brachii, is so high that a stimulus giving 
a maximum EPSP (cf. Figs. 3B, 7B) is almost always subthreshold for the 
motor fibre. With other muscles the antidromic spike may be superimposed 
with a stimulus that is sometimes not strong enough to give a maximum mono- 
synaptic EPSP (cf. Figs. 4B, 8C), although usually the alpha efferents have 
higher thresholds than all the Ia afferents (cf. Hoffmann, 1922; Kénig, 1952). 
This complication has been eliminated by blocking antidromic propagation 
into the motoneurone by means of a hyperpolarizing current that is applied 
through the micro-electrode (cf. Fig. 2#). With such a procedure the homony- 
mous and heteronymous EPSP’s have been determined during the passage of 
the same hyperpolarizing current. Furthermore, hyperpolarization has been 


observed to cause very little alteration in the size of EPSP’s (Coombs et al. 


1955c), so values determined in this way do not require correction before 
being compared with values derived for motoneurones that were not sub- 
jected to hyperpolarization. However, the height of the EPSP could not 
then be measured directly because it was superimposed on the declining phase 


of the M spike. In order to obtain an accurate value, records were taken at 


and th 
possibl 
branch 
the ne 
tested 


j thresh 
motor 
lower 
blocks 
EPSP 
This d 
| was ac 
axon { 
EPSP 
| cation 
It w 
memb 
been g 
é et al. 1 
that 
damag 
moton 
the rel 
| section 
the up 
4 the mc 
4 and fo 
accord 
rectus 
regard 
1924) } 
Fig. 
| 
hetero 
: of the 
Fig. 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 27 


threshold strength for the motor axon and thereafter at supramaximal strength. 
The EPSP contributed by those afferents with a higher threshold than the 
motor axon could then be added to the EPSP produced by those afferents with 
lower threshold than the motor axon. With some motoneurones antidromic 
blockage developed during the investigation (cf. Fig. 4B, C), and the maximum 
EPSP could then be determined without having recourse to hyperpolarization. 
This developing blockage served to show that in this case the maximum EPSP 
was actually produced by a stimulus that was subthreshold for the motor 
axon (compare Fig. 4D with 4C). A similar complication occurred when the 
EPSP was large enough to generate a spike potential (cf. Fig. 9.B). This compli- 
cation may likewise be eliminated by a hyperpolarizing current. 

It will be noted in the tables that for many types of motoneurone the mean 
membrane potential was considerably below the value of —70 mV that has 
been given for motoneurones virtually undamaged by the impalement (Brock 
et al. 1952; Coombs et al. 1955a). The series has included many motoneurones 
that have abnormally low resting potentials, presumably on account of 
damage by the micro-electrode. It may be assumed that the EPSP’s of these 
motoneurones are also proportionally diminished (cf. Coombs et al. 1955c), but 
the relative sizes of the EPSP’s set up by the various afferent volleys (lower 
sections of tables) should not be affected thereby. The mean EPSP’s given in 
the upper sections of the tables will probably be 10-20% too low for most of 
the motoneurones. 


Monosynaptic excitation of different groups of motoneurones 

Knee extensors. The quadriceps nerve supplies all the knee extensor muscles, 
and for evaluating the receptor fields it has usually been subdivided in 
accordance with its three functional components: the double-joint muscle, 
rectus femoris; the slow red muscle, crureus (also called vastus intermedius) ; 
and the fast pale vasti, i.e. vastus lateralis plus vastus medialis. Often it was 
possible to use only the nerve to vastus lateralis, for the arrangement of 
branches made it difficult to retain the nerve to vastus medialis when isolating 
the nerve to crureus. Seven of the twenty-three rectus motoneurones were 
tested only with rectus and crureus volleys. Originally Sherrington (1910) 
regarded rectus femoris as a hip flexor muscle, but later (Liddell & Sherrington, 
1924) he also gave it a knee extensor function (cf. Eccles & Granit, 1929). 

Fig. 1 illustrates the responses of a rectus femoris motoneurone, in which 
much larger monosynaptic EPSP’s were evoked homonymously (A, B, C) than 
heteronymously from the nerves to the vasti (D), or crureus (£). In every one 
of the twenty-three rectus motoneurones the homonymous EPSP was like- 
wise several times larger than the heteronymous. 

Fig. 2 shows typically that with the monosynaptic responses of vasti moto- 
neurones, the maximal homonymous EPSP (£) is much larger than the 


By. 
£ 
z= 
i 
if 


28 J. 0. ECCLES AND OTHERS B 
maximal responses evoked heteronymously from crureus (F) or rectus (() 
nerves. As noted previously, the antidromic impulse in the motor axon 


produced the small initial M spike in Z. The anomalous monosynaptic EPSP’s . — 
(D, H) evoked by biceps-semitendinosus volleys will be considered later. prod 


Fig. 3. 

A ne 

Sti 

Fig. 1. Upper traces are intracellular records from a rectus femoris motoneurone, internal posi- tre 
tivity (depolarization) being signalled upwards. Lower traces are recorded by an electrode. 
making contact with the L6 dorsal root as it enters the spinal cord, negativity being signalled 
downwards, A, B, C and F are evoked by volleys in rectus femoris nerve; D in vastus 
lateralis; Z in crureus. Strengths of stimulation are indicated on each record relative to the 

threshold strength for that nerve, the threshold for the motor axon being 2-1 on that scale ((), Mot 
Time scales, msec; all intracellular traces at the same speed and all except F at the same 

amplification. 

Re 

Va 

Cr 

B. 

Re 

Va 

Cr 

Fig. 2. Asin Fig. 1, but for a vastus lateralis motoneurone and dorsal root traces are above in all -~ 
but one of the respective intracellular traces. A, E are evoked by volleys in vastus lateralis 

nerve; B, F, crureus nerve; C, G, rectus femoris nerve; D, H, biceps-semitendinosus nerve, recta 

Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to respective thresholds. All intracellular Grani 

traces are at same speed and amplification. vasti | 

fibres 


With the nineteen crureus neurones that have been fully investigated, vastt J oontr; 
volleys have evoked larger monosynaptic EPSP’s (Fig. 3G) than have recept 
crureus volleys (Fig. 3B) in all but two. The crureus volley in B would be solitai 
generating a maximum EPSP, for it was set up by a stimulus 50% strongef by a1 
than that evoking almost the same size of EPSP in EF; hence we have here all mean 


othe 
tendi 
A 1 
a 
D 24 3 1-75 
4 23 
4 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 29 


example of heteronymous EPSP’s that are larger than homonymous. On the 
other hand, the heteronymous rectus volley always evoked an EPSP (D) much 
smaller than the crureus response. Finally Fig. 3H shows the typical IPSP 
produced by the group Ia fibres of the antagonistic muscle, biceps-semi- 
tendinosus. 


| 

A 
| 


Fig. 3. As in Fig. 2, but for a crureus motoneurone. A, B, FE, F are evoked by volleys in crureus 
nerve; C, G, vastus lateralis nerve; D, rectus femoris nerve; H, biceps-semitendinosus nerve. 
Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to respective thresholds. All intracellular 
traces are at same speed and amplification. 


TaBie l. Knee extensor motoneurones 
Nerves stimulated for testing volleys 


Motoneurones - potential Rectus Vastus Crureus 
A. Mean resting membrane potentials and mean voltages of maximum monosynaptic 
EPSP’s (mV) (numbers of motoneurones investigated in parentheses). 


Rectus 64 (19) ‘9 (23) 0-66 (16) 0-37 (23) 
Vastus 58 (26) ~ 0-55 (25) 2-72 (27) 1-51 (27) | 
Crureus 57 (11) 0-66 (19) 3-45 (19) 2-3 (19) 


B. Means of ratios for heteronymous EPSP’s expressed relative to the corresponding 
homonymous EPSP’s (standard deviations in parentheses). 
Rectus — | 10 0-15 (0-15) 0-09 (0-09) 


Vastus 0-17 (0-12) 10 0-55 (0-18) | 
Crureus — 0-27 (0-20) 1-58 (0-62) 10 


In Table 1A it is seen that, according to the criterion of receptor fields, 
rectus motoneurones form a distinctive subgroup of quadriceps (cf. Eccles & 
Granit, 1929). They receive relatively little monosynaptic activation from the 
vasti and erureus nerves, and, complementarily, impulses in rectus group Ia 
fibres have little excitatory action on vasti and crureus motoneurones. In 
contrast, the vasti and crureus motoneurones have virtually indistinguishable 
receptor fields and are shown ‘boxed in’ by an enclosing line as also is the 
solitary rectus. For example, both types are activated almost twice as strongly 
by a maximum vasti volley as by a maximum crureus volley, the respective 
mean values for EPSP’s being 2-7 and 1-5mV for vasti motoneurones 


4 
4 
4 
4 
2 
a 
4 
| 


30 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


and 3-45 and 2°3mV for crureus motoneurones. Presumably the hetero- 
nymous excitation of crureus motoneurones by vasti volleys is more powerful 
than their homonymous excitation by crureus volleys because there are 
many more group Ia fibres in the vasti nerves than in the crureus nerve. 

The general indication from Table 1A is that a difference in mechanical 
operation of a muscle is reflected in the pattern of monosynaptic activation, 
i.e. the double-joint rectus as against the single-joint vasti and crureus. On the 
other hand, monosynaptic activation shows a relative distribution that takes 
no account of the postural (crureus) or phasic (vasti) function of the muscle, 
though it is more potent on the postural motoneurones, The nerve volleys used 
in Tables 2-4, with the exception of flexor digitorum brevis, were also tested 
on the knee extensor motoneurones and were found to be ineffective mono- 
synaptically except for the occasional actions described in the section on 
aberrant responses. 

In Table 1B the same results are presented in a different way. For each 
motoneurone the sizes of the maximum heteronymous EPSP’s were first 
expressed relative to the maximum homonymous EPSP, and the means and 
standard deviations of these ratios were then calculated for each type of 
heteronymous action on that species of motoneurone. This procedure has been 
devised in order to minimize errors arising on account of the inclusion in the 
series of motoneurones whose resting potentials were distributed over the range 
from the normal value of about 70 mV to as low as 40 mV. It may be assumed 
that any depression of the membrane potential of a motoneurone would cause 
a comparable depression of all the EPSP’s evoked in such a motoneurone 
(cf. Coombs e¢ al. 1955c), i.e. that the ratios calculated as above would be 
unaffected thereby. Consequently the means of these ratios in Table 1 B give 
an undistorted measure of the relative potencies of the Ia excitations exerted 
by the various afferent volleys on any particular species of motoneurone. 

Knee flexors. As first described by Sherrington (1907, 1910) and later con- 
firmed by Lloyd (19465), only a fraction of the hamstring group of muscles 
responds in the flexor reflex. The semimembranosus muscle is entirely con- 
cerned in extension of the hip, as also is the anterior part of biceps femoris. As 
a routine procedure we have subdivided the nerve to biceps femoris into two 
components which we have called biceps femoris anterior and biceps femoris 
posterior, the former being the most proximal branch or branches, passing 
anteriorly through the muscle, while the latter comprises the remaining one or 
two branches. This subdivision has been found to be rather successful in 
conserving the knee-flexor component, all but one of the twenty-one posterior 
biceps motoneurones being synergic with the semitendinosus. Our experi- 
ments have also confirmed Sherrington (1907, 1910) in showing that the 
gracilis muscle functions as a knee flexor, fér the twenty-five gracilis moto- 
neurones have all been heteronymously activated by a volley in the combined 


gracilis 
action | 
has eve 
volleys. 


semiter 
| motone 
gracilis 
| | Asi 
| synapti 
extent 
A 131 
12 
Fig. 4. 
i] sem 
| tion 
sho 
| 
Ser 
Pos 
hetero 
always 
|  differe 
no mo 
have 
excite 
prc xin 
| On 
excitat 
3 herve 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 31 


semitendinosus-posterior biceps nerve, and out of twenty-five semitendinosus 
motoneurones only three failed to receive monosynaptic innervation from 
gracilis. 

As illustrated in Fig. 42, @, K, posterior biceps volleys have always mono- 
synaptically innervated semitendinosus motoneurones, but to a smaller 
extent than the homonymous innervation (Fig. 4B, C, J). Furthermore, 
gracilis volleys have almost always had a small monosynaptic excitatory 
action (cf. Fig. 42). On the other hand, no monosynaptic excitatory action 
has ever been observed for anterior biceps volleys (Fig. 4) or for sartorius 
volleys. 


D, 1.57 


Fig. 4. As in Fig. 2, but for a semitendinosus motoneurone. A, B, C, D are evoked by volleys in 
semitendinosus nerve; #, G, posterior biceps; F, anterior biceps; H, quadriceps. The dorsal 
root trace is recorded from L7 dorsal root as it enters the spinal cord. Strengths of stimula- 
tion are indicated as in Fig. 1. /—Z are records from a different semitendinosus motoneurone 
showing EPSP evoked by semitendinosus volleys, /, J; by posterior biceps volley, K; and by 
a gracilis volley, L. Intracellular traces A-H are at the same speed and amplification. 
Separate time scale for J-L and potential scales for -K and for L. 


Posterior biceps motoneurones have closely resembled semitendinosus, 
heteronymous excitation by semitendinosus volleys (cf. Fig. 5D) being again 
always less than homonymous (Fig. 5A). However, there is a significant 
difference from semitendinosus motoneurones in that gracilis volleys have had 
ho monosynaptic action on the fourteen posterior biceps motoneurones that 
have been so tested (cf. Fig. 5F). The same gracilis volley was observed to 
excite monosynaptically several semitendinosus motoneurones in close 
proximity to these posterior biceps motoneurones (Fig. 42). 

On gracilis motoneurones it was remarkable that the heteronymous 
excitatory action of a volley in the combined semitendinosus-posterior biceps 
nerve was sometimes almost as large as the homonymous excitatory action, 


A 131 By 11-69 C, 1-96 

w 

| [1 mv 
TTT q 
| 


32 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


heteronymous action (mean 64% of the homonymous, cf. Table 2B) was 
exerted on motoneurones about two segments more rostral than the level of 
entry of the afferent volley into the spinal cord. The identification of gracilis 
motoneurones as knee flexors is also indicated by the direct inhibitory action of 


C14 


Fig. 5. Asin Fig. 
dorsal root trace in all but F. A, B, C are evoked by volleys in posterior biceps nerve; D, EF by 
semitendinosus nerve; F by gracilis nerve. Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to 
the respective thresholds. All intracellular traces are at same speed and amplification. 


msec 


Fig. 6. As in Fig. 1, but for a gracilis motoneurone, and the dorsal root traces are below the 
respective intracellular traces. A, B are evoked by volleys in gracilis nerve; C by semi- 
tendinosus nerve and D by posterior biceps nerve. All intracellular traces are at same speed 


quadriceps group Ia volleys. It is now possible to identify as gracilis moto- 
neurones the two motoneurones monosynaptically innervated from semi- 
tendinosus-biceps posterior that Eccles, Fatt & Landgren (1956) found in the 
upper L6 segment, and which were then believed to be sartorius motoneurones. 
The complete results of our experiments on eighty-three knee-flexor 
motoneurones are shown in Tables 2.4 and B. Semitendinosus and posterior 
biceps are closely linked by their receptor fields and are shown ‘boxed in’ by 
an enclosing line in Table 2. Gracilis appears to be more independent, at least 
in so far as posterior biceps motoneurones are concerned. Anatomically 
gracilis and semitendinosus muscles have very similar points of insertion on 
the medial side of the tibia; hence a similarity of receptor fields would be 


expected for their respective motoneurones despite the large segmental 


semitendinosus in particular heing very effective (Fig. 6C). This powerful 


4 
separe 
| were 
action 
q Semiten 
|  Gracilis 
Posteri 
| Semite 
3 Gracilis 
Me 
D conce 
| i.e. in 
digiton 
4 gation 
| aticall 
and amplification. muscle 
and p 
functi 
respon 
Fig. 
F by aff 
always 
sponse 
media 
additi 
impu 
monos 
this m 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 33 


separation, The nerve volleys used in Tables 1, 3 and 4, with the exception of 
flexor digitorum brevis, were also tested on the knee flexor motoneurones and 
were found to be ineffective monosynaptically except for the occasional 
actions described in the section on aberrant responses. 


TaBLe 2. Knee flexor motoneurones 
Nerves stimulated for testing volleys 
Motoneurones potential Posterior biceps Semitendinosus Gracilis 


A. Mean resting membrane potentials and mean voltages of maximum monosynaptic 
EPSP’s (mV) (numbers of motoneurones investigated in parentheses). 


Posterior biceps 58-7 (20) | 3-5 (20) QI 0 (14 
Semitendinosus 60 (25) 1-8 (37) 4-75 (35) | Obs ies) 
Gracilis 51 (8) 0-65 (11) 1-7 (11) 3-38 (12) 


60 (13) 1-95 (14) 3-2 (14) 


B. Means of ratios for heteronymous EPSP’s expressed relative to the corresponding 
homonymous EPSP’s (standard deviations in parentheses). 


Posterior biceps — 10 0-55 (0-21) | 0 (9) 
Semitendinosus —_— 0-39 (0-18) 1-0 0-19 (0-13) 
Gracilis sie 0-24 (0-25) 0-51 (0-13) 10 


0-64 (0-29) 1-0 


Motoneurones with axons in popliteal nerve. The investigation was initially 
concerned with motoneurones that functioned primarily as ankle extensors, 
i.e. in the soleus-gastrocnemius group, but it was found that they shared 
receptor fields with plantaris motoneurones and these in turn with flexor 
digitorum brevis and flexor digitorum longus motoneurones, hence the investi- 
gation was extended to cover all of these motoneurones. Motoneurones 
belonging to other muscles innervated by the popliteal nerve were not system- 
atically examined. However, afferent volleys in the nerve to tibialis posterior 
muscle invariably had weak monosynaptic actions on lateral gastrocnemius 
and plantaris motoneurones, so possibly this muscle has some ankle extensor 
function. Sherrington (1910) reported that the tibialis posterior muscle did not 
respond either as an extensor or flexor muscle. 

Fig. 7 illustrates the characteristic responses evoked in a soleus motoneurone 
by afferent volleys in a variety of muscle nerves. The soleus afferent volley 
always generated a larger monosynaptic EPSP (B) than the maximum re- 
sponses evoked by such heteronymous volleys as those in lateral gastrocnemius, 
medial gastrocnemius and plantaris nerves (F, H and J respectively). An 
additional feature of great interest (records M and N) was that the group la 
impulses of quadriceps nerve almost always (12 out of a total of 13) evoked a 
monosynaptic EPSP in soleus motoneurones. It has further been shown that 


this monosynaptic excitatory action is exerted by afferent impulses from both 
3 PHYSIO. OXXXVII 


The large brackets signify that the two nerves were used conjointly. | 


34 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


the vastus and crureus branches to quadriceps muscle, while in the few tests 
so far made the rectus branch has been ineffective (cf. Fig. 7L). Finally 
Fig. 7K illustrates the invariable finding that an afferent volley in the nerve to 
flexor digitorum longus has no monosynaptic excitatory action on soleus 
motoneurones. 


M_1-10 N O 64 P 
m 
msec 
msec 


Fig. 7. As in Fig. 4, but for a soleus motoneurone. A, B, 0, D, O, P are evoked by volleys in 
soleus nerve; HZ, F, lateral gastrocnemius; G, H, medial gastrocnemius; J, J, plantaris; K, 
flexor digitorum longus; L, rectus femoris; M, N, vasto-crureus. Strengths of stimulation 
are indicated as in Fig. 1. All traces except D and O are at same slow rate. Voltage scale is 
common to all intracellular traces except D, O and P. Separate msec scales for D, O. 


In Fig. 8 a medial gastrocnemius motoneurone is seen also to be much more 
effectively activated homonymously (B) than heteronymously by afferent 
volleys in lateral gastrocnemius and soleus nerves (F and J respectively). In 
contrast to soleus motoneurones, the twenty medial gastrocnemius moto- 
neurones were never monosynaptically activated by quadriceps volleys (cf. 
Fig. 8L), and, with the exception of two very small responses, were also not 
activated by plantaris volleys (cf. Fig. 8G). Almost invariably flexor digi- 
torum longus volleys were ineffective (Fig. 8K). 

A very unusual arrangement of synergic muscles is presented by plantaris 
and flexor digitorum brevis which pull in series instead of the usual in- 
parallel arrangement of synergists. The plantaris tendon passes through 
a tunnel in the gastrocnemius-soleus tendon and so around the tuberosity of 
the calcaneus and into the plantar region of the foot, where the flexor 
digitorum brevis muscle is, as it were, interpolated in the tendon. A very high 
degree of reciprocity of receptor fields might be expected for two muscles thus 
pulling through each other, for very little tension can be developed by an 


active 
the fle 
nymou 
special 
Presun 
C4 187 
q A 12 D 59 : pu ing 
E 1.36 F 24 G 133 H 
| 1-42 J 4.27 KL. 34 L, 23 E 4- 
1-46 
Fig. 8. 
vo 
p AT 
md 
the 
Co 
J A 4.47 
D 1.79 
Fig. 9. 
ne 
th 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 35 


active muscle in series with a flaccid muscle. However, as illustrated in Fig. 9D, 
the flexor digitorum brevis volleys did not have a specially potent hetero- 
nymous excitatory action, and, reciprocally, plantaris volleys were also not 
specially potent on flexor digitorum brevis motoneurones (cf. Table 3). 
Presumably the homonymous excitatory action is adequate to cause a reflex 
contraction of one of the in-series synergic pair if the other is contracting and 
pulling through it. This mechanism for ensuring co-contraction of synergists is 


D 1-55 


Fig. 8. As in Fig. 4, but for a medial gastrocnemius motoneurone. A, B, C, D, H are evoked by 
volleys in medial gastrocnemius nerve; #, F by lateral gastrocnemius; /, J by soleus; G by 
plantaris; K by flexor digitorum longus; L by quadriceps volleys. Strengths of stimuli are 
indicated on each record relative to the threshold strength for that nerve, the threshold for 
the motor axon being 1-55, Time scales :nsec; all traces except D and H being at the slow rate. 
Common voltage and time scale for all intracellular traces except D and H. 


VEG 
msec 


A 1.47 


Fig. 9. As in Fig. 5, but for a plantaris motoneurone. A, B, F are evoked by volleys in plantaris 
nr O, by flexor digitorum longus nerve; D, by flexor digitorum brevis nerve; £, by 
jus-soleus nerve. Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to the respective 

thresholds, All intracellular traces are at same speed and amplification except F, which has 


a separate potential scale. 


3-2 


A 124 
> 
msec 
4-46 J 24 K i345 L 7-4 4 
B 1-97 q 
; 
D E 
4 


36 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


of course not operable with in-parallel synergists. The monosynaptic excitatory 
action of a gastrocnemius-soleus volley on plantaris motoneurones was usually 
much smaller than that illustrated (Fig. 92), and sometimes was absent. 
Usually flexor digitorum longus volleys had a monosynaptic excitatory action 
on plantaris motoneurones of about the size illustrated in Fig. 9C. 


Taste 3. Motoneurones supplying popliteal nerve 
Nerves stimulated for testing volleys 
Moto. Resting Medial Lateral 
neurones potential gastroc. gastroc. Soleus Plantaris FDB FDL Quad 
A. Mean resting membrane potentials and mean voltages of maximum monosynaptic 
EPSP’s (mV) (numbers of motoneurones investigated in parentheses). 


Medial 61 62 105 _ 
18 20 15 

gastroc. (6) (10) (10) (10) (10) (2) (4) (6) 

Soleus 59 2-3 5-6 13 0-95 
(8) (9) (6) (9) (9) (6) (13) 

Plantaris 57 0-4 505 «OOS 0 
(31) (22) - (33) (17) (26) (8) 

FDB 51 0-1 045 24 0-1 
(7) (3) (8) (9) (5) 

FDL 66 0-1 0-3 03 68 0 
(29) ‘ (26) (29) (3) 31 (5) 


B. Means of ratios for heteronymous EPSP’s expressed relative to the corresponding 
homonymous EPSP’s (standard deviations in parentheses). 


gastroc. (008) (12) | (01) 

Lateral 1-0 0-62 0-5 0 0 0-04 

gastroc. (0-25) (0-38) | (0-27) (0-05) 

Soleus 0-36 0-26 1-0 0-27 0-16 

(0-17) (018) (0-19) (0-2) 

Plantaris ose 0-08 1-0 0-32 | O18 0 
(0-06) (0-11) | (16) 

(1) (0-06) 

FDL 0-04 009 +4003 [| 10 | 0 

(0-03) (0-1) (0-04) 


FDB=Flexor digitorum brevis; FDL =flexor digitorum longus. The large brackets signify 
that the three nerves were used conjointly. 


Since the essential quantitative values are stated in Tables 3A and B, no 
illustrative figures need be given for motoneurones belonging to the other 
muscles. The gastrocnemius-soleus motoneurones are seen to be a closely 
linked group with an exclusive ankle-extensor function, and are shown 
“boxed in’ by an enclosing line, as also are the in-series synergists, plantaris 
and flexor digitorum brevis. It is further seen that the plantaris serves to link 
together such otherwise unrelated groups as the gastrocnemius-soleus on the 
one hand and the flexor digitorum brevis and longus on the other. For 


exerte 


neuro! 
soleus 
except 
found 
descri’ 
Mot 
(1910) 
flexor: 
flexor 
excita 
and e: 
Tib 
ingly 
digito 
suppli 


examy 
soleus 
both 

| recip 
action 
extent 
that f 
inne 

isolati 
(cf. LI 
| to be 

Mot 
jected 
almos 
aggres 
nerves 
neuro 
motor 
produ 
latera 
the he 
volley 
gastro 
five o 
simila 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 37 


example, plantaris afferent volleys have a very effective excitatory action on 
soleus and lateral gastrocnemius motoneurones, and are also fairly effective on 
both types of flexor digitorum motoneurones. These diverse actions are 
reciprocated in the receptor field for plantaris motoneurones. This bivalent 
action of plantaris is not unexpected, for it is effectively placed to act both in 
extending the ankle and in plantar-flexing the digits. Table 3 further indicates 
that flexor digitorum longus is relatively isolated from the other muscles 
innervated by the popliteal nerve, and is individually ‘boxed in’. This 
isolation is to be expected on account of its special function of claw protrusion 
(cf. Lloyd & McIntyre, 1948). The poverty of heteronymous excitation appears 
to be compensated by a powerful homonymous action. 

Motoneurones of the postural red muscle, soleus, are observed to be sub- 
jected to a remarkably powerful monosynaptic excitatory action, aggregating 
almost 11 mV on the average, which is about 25% above the next highest 
aggregate. It appears from Table 3B that medial and lateral gastrocnemius 
nerves differ very much in the reciprocal action on their respective moto- 
neurones. A medial gastrocnemius volley produces in lateral gastrocnemius 
motoneurones a monosynaptic EPSP which is larger (ratio 1-11) than that 
produced by a lateral gastrocnemius volley. In the reciprocal situation the 
lateral gastrocnemius volley is only about one-fifth (ratio 0-19) as effective as 
the homonymous volley. The lateral gastrocnemius motoneurones appear to 
resemble soleus more than medial gastrocnemius motoneurones, Thus plantaris 
volleys invariably exerted a monosynaptic action on both soleus and lateral 
gastrocnemius motoneurones, whereas there was only a very small action on 
five of the nineteen medial gastrocnemius motoneurones. However, this 
similarity did not fully extend to the action of quadriceps volleys, which 
exerted only a slight monosynaptic action on two lateral gastrocnemius moto- 
neurones in contrast to their much more potent action on twelve of the thirteen 
soleus motoneurones. The nerve volleys used in Tables 1, 2 and 4, with the 
exception of gracilis, were also tested on the motoneurones of Table 3 and were 
found to be ineffective monosynaptically except for the occasional actions 
described in the section on aberrant responses. 

Motoneurones with axons in the peroneal nerve. According to Sherrington 
(1910) tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus are the principal ankle 
flexors. Peroneus longus and extensor digitorum brevis also responded in 
flexor reflexes, but peroneus brevis and tertius failed to exhibit either an 
excitatory or inhibitory reaction, and so could not be classified in his flexor 
and extensor subdivision. 

Tibialis anterior muscle operates as a simple ankle flexor, and correspond- 
ingly the receptor field of its motoneurones always includes the extensor 
digitorum longus muscle (ef. Fig. 10C) but virtually not at all the other muscles 
supplied by the peroneal nerve (Fig. 10D, E, F). 


ow 
> 
4 
“Aj 
i 
i 
« 
} 


38 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


A wider receptor field is exhibited by the peroneus longus motoneurone of 
Fig. 11. Invariably, as in Fig. 110, Z, volleys from extensor digitorum longus 
and peroneus brevis nerves evoked good monosynaptic responses, while 
a peroneus tertius volley also usually gave a small response, as in Fig, 11 F. In 


contrast, volleys from tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum brevis nerves 


usually were ineffective, as in Fig. 11H, though on occasional motoneurones 
there was a slight action (cf. Fig. 114). 


A 245 


Fig. 10. As in Fig. 4 but for a tibialis anterior motoneurone. A, B are evoked by volleys in 
tibialis anterior nerve; C, by extensor digitorum longus nerve; D, by peroneus brevis nerve; 
E, by peroneus tertius nerve; F, by peroneus longus nerve. Strengths of stimulation are 
indicated relative to the respective thresholds. All intracellular traces are at same speed and 
amplification. | 


Fig. 11. As in Fig. 5, but for a peroneus longus moteneurone. A, B, D are evoked by volleys in 
peroneus longus nerve; C, extensor digitorum longus nerve; Z, peroneus brevis nerve; F, 
peroneus tertius nerve; G, tibialis anterior nerve; H, extensor digitorum brevis nerve. 
Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to the respective thresholds. All intracellular 
traces except D are at same speed and amplification. 


The complex pattern of interaction is shown in Table 4. At the top left 
corner the ankle flexors, tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus are 
“boxed in’ by an enclosing line because they have a close reciprocal linkage by 
receptor fields, with homonymous activation about three times more powerful 
than heteronymous. On the lower right corner the three peroneus muscles 
appear also to be reciprocally linked and are similarly ‘boxed in’. Unfortu- 
nately the numbers of peroneus brevis and tertius motoneurones were too 


small t 
becaus 
ally it 
would 
flexing 
A. 
i B 24 
Tibialis 
anteri« 
Perone 
lon gus 
Peronet 
brevis 
Perone 
tertius 
B 
> > Tibialis 
1-4 1-62 1-42 E | —E anteri 
Di8 
msec 
Perone 
brevis 
E.D. 
3 signify 
and 
“boxe 
actiol 
a stra 
brevis 
this 
powe 
q Table 
long 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 39 


small to allow final conclusions to be drawn, but such a linkage is very probable 
because the three muscles operate similarly as everters of the foot. Operation- 
ally it would also be expected that extensor digitorum longus and brevis 
would be reciprocally linked on account of their common action in dorsi- 
flexing the digits, but the linkage is seen to be surprisingly weak in Table 4, 


TaBLE 4. Motoneurones supplying peroneal nerve 
Nerves stimulated for testing volleys 
“Tibialis Peroneus Peroneus Peroneus 
Motoneurones potential anterior EDL EDB longus brevis __ tertius 


A. Mean resting membrane potentials and mean voltages of maximum monosynaptic 
EPSP’s (mV) (numbers of motoneurones investigated in parentheses). 


Tibialis 59 4-5 . 0 0 0 0 
anterior (12) (14) (ia) (9) (11) (11) (8) 
EDL 68 0-9 ; eT 0-4 0-4 0-3 0-2 

(14) (15) (15) (14) (15) (14) (7) 
EDB 59 0-12 0-5 2-2 0: 1-5 0-5 
(15) (16) (17) (17) | (16) (17) | (7) 
Peroneus 0 6 0-03 3 1-56 0-19 
longus (12) (12) (13) (7) (13) (9) (5) 
Peroneus 70 0 0-1 1-75 2-1 — 
brevis (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) 
Peroneus 70 0-2 — 1-0 2-2 3-2 
tertius (1) (1) (1) (1) _ 


B. Means of ratios for heteronymous EPSP’s expressed relative to the corresponding 
homonymous EPSP’s (standard deviation in parentheses). 


Tibialis “ns TO 0-45 0 0 0 0 
anterior (0-24) 
EDL olen 0-22 § 10 0-14 — 0-2 0-13 0-12 
(0-21) | (0-13) (0-15) (0-08) (0-18) 
EDB jose 004 5 0-21 1-0 0-07 0-61 0-23 
(0-05) § (0-13) (0-15) (0-59) (0-32) 
Peroneus pate 0 0-41 0 1-0 
Peroneus 0 0-03 0-92 
brevis (0-05) (0-05) (0-10) 


E.D.L. «Extensor digitorum longus; E.D.B.=extensor digitorum brevis. Thé large brackets 
signify that the two nerves were used conjointly. 


and consequently the ‘boxing’ is shown by a dotted line only. These various 
‘boxed in’ subgroups are seen to include most of the effective monosynaptic 
actions of Table 4. However, extensor digitorum longus volleys also exert 
a strong monosynaptic action on peroneus longus motoneurones, and peroneus 
brevis volleys very effectively excite extensor digitorum brevis motoneurones, 
this latter heteronymous action upon several motoneurones being more 
powerful than the homonymous action on them. Finally a general feature of 
Table 4 is the wide range of the receptor fields from which extensor digitorum 
longus and brevis motoneurones draw their monosynaptic excitation. The 


‘ 
| ‘ 
, 
| 
a 


40 J. C. ECCLES AND OTHERS 


nerve volleys used in Tables 1-3, with the exception of gracilis and flexor 
digitorum brevis, were also tested on the motoneurones of Table 4, and were 
found to be ineffective monosynaptically except for the occasional actions 
reported in the section on aberrant responses. 

Motoneurones innervating elbow extensors. By similar techniques the mono- 
synaptic receptor fields have also been determined for the forelimb muscles 
that extend the elbow. There is a close parallel between the assembled results 
in Table 5 and those for the knee extensors in Table 1. For example, caput 
longum of triceps brachii resembles rectus femoris in being a double-joint 


5. Elbow extensor motoneurones 
Nerves stimulated for testing volleys 
t Caput Caput 
Motoneurones Interale medi Anconeus 
A. Mean resting membrane potentials and mean voltages of maximum monosynaptic 
EPSP’s (mV) (numbers of motoneurones investigated in parentheses). 
Caput longum 56-5 (25) 3-8 (33) 0-13 (27) 0-58 (32) 0-09 (24) 
Caput laterale 57-5 (19) 1-03 (22) 


) 
Caput mediale 57 (27) 1-26 (19) 1-95 (19) 3-44 (30) 1-2 (25) 
Anconeus 58-5 (6) 0-47 (3) 1-62 (6) 2.85 (7) 1-84 (7) 


B. Means of ratios for heteronymous EPSP’s expressed relative to the corresponding 
homonymous EPSP’s (standard deviation in parentheses). 


Caput longum se 1-0 0-04 (0-09) 0-16 (0-22) 0-03 (0-07) 
Caput laterale 1-04 (0-66) [TO 

Caput mediale 0-50 (0-17) | 0-61 (0-15) 10 0-39 (0-21) 
Anconeus on 0-55 (0-09) | 1-14 (1-2) 1-64 (0-71) 140 


muscle, the respective origins being from the shoulder girdle and the pelvic 
girdle. Correspondingly caput longum motoneurones resemble rectus femoris 
motoneurones in receiving very little heteronymous monosynaptic excitation 
from the nerves to the other elbow extensors, but the nerve to caput longum is 
relatively effective on motoneurones of the other elbow extensors. On the 
other hand, the remaining elbow extensors form a group with close reciprocal 
linkage by receptor fields, as ‘boxed in’ by an enclosing line in Tables 5A 
and B. The red, slow, caput mediale is remarkable both for the powerful 
monosynaptic excitatory action exerted on its motoneurones and for the very 
effective heteronymous excitatory action of its nerve. The anconeus muscle is 
also partly of the red, slow type and its motoneurones occupy an inter- 
mediate position. The aggregate monosynaptic EPSP is about 20% larger for 
caput mediale motoneurones than for anconeus motoneurones, which in turn 
have a much higher aggregate than the motoneurones of the other two heads 
of triceps brachii. Afferent volleys in other forelimb nerves were not tested on 
the motoneurones of Table 5. 


It v 
F conne? 
a syne 
Lapo 
one pe 
ankle. 
patte 
| monos 
| Fig. 7 
gastro 
monos 
tibialis 
Oth 
occasit 
motor 
_Teceive 
from 
direct 
microe 
ally e3 
also be 
illustrs 
exciter 
{ action 
nheuror 
| Fig. 2 
The 
aberrs 
antic 
Fig. 1: 
i semite 
gastro 
Cases 
polariz 
| to an 
microe 
record 
q tions ¢ 
for thi 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 41 


Aberrant monosynaptic responses 

It would hitherto have been assumed that the excitatory monosynaptic 
connexions conformed to a normal pattern only when they occurred within 
a synergic group of muscles as strictly defined by Lloyd (19465) and by 
Laporte & Lloyd (1952), that is, within a group of muscles actively subserving 
one particular movement at a joint, for example flexion or extension at the 
ankle. A number of responses have been found that do not conform to this 
pattern. Some have been frequently observed: the almost invariably observed 
monosynaptic excitation of soleus motoneurones by quadriceps volleys (cf. 
Fig. 7M, N; Table 3); the occasional monosynaptic excitation of lateral 
gastrocnemius motoneurones by quadriceps volleys (Table 3); the small 
monosynaptic excitation of extensor digitorum brevis motoneurones by 
tibialis anterior volleys (Table 4). 

Other deviations from the expected pattern have been observed only 
occasionally and these will here be classified as aberrant responses. Several 
motoneurones belonging to the anterior tibial group of muscles were found to 
_Teceive monosynaptic excitatory action from biceps-semitendinosus and others 
from gastrocnemius and plantaris. Brock et al. (1952) reported two examples 
of aberrant connexions, but the one illustrated can now be interpreted as a 
direct IPSP that had been inverted by diffusion of chloride ions out of the 
microelectrode. In the other example a peroneus longus volley monosynaptic- 
ally excited a gastrocnemius motoneurone. An aberrant connexion that has 
also been observed with several motoneurones in more than one experiment is 
illustrated in Fig. 2D, H. A biceps-semitendinosus volley monosynaptically 
excited a vastus motoneurone instead of the normal direct inhibitory 
action, which was even observed in some adjacent quadriceps moto- 
neurones, though two others also exhibited the same aberrant action as in 
Fig. 2D, H. 

The experiment illustrated by Fig. 12 provided extreme examples of 
aberrancy of monosynaptic connexions. The ventral roots were divided, so 
antidromic identification could not be done; however, the large EPSP in 
Fig. 12.4, E suggested that the motoneurone belonged to the posterior biceps- 
_Semitendinosus group, yet it was also monosynaptically innervated by 
gastrocnemius (B, F) and by quadriceps (C, D, G, H) afferent fibres. In both 
cases depolarizing the motoneurone revealed the presence of a later hyper- 
polarizing IPSP (F, G, H), so the initial depolarizing response was not due 
to an IPSP that had been inverted by diffusion of Cl- ions out of the 
microelectrode (cf. Coombs et al. 19556). Furthermore, the extracellular 
records J and K showed that the recorded responses were actually depolariza- 
tions of the motoneuronal membrane with latencies of 0-45 msec, and 0-8 msec 
for the responses to gastrocnemius and quadriceps volleys respectively. At 


* 
' 
a 
4 
a 


42 J.C, ECCLES AND OTHERS 


this segmental level all nine of the intracellularly investigated biceps-semi- 
tendinosus motoneurones were monosynaptically activated by gastrocnemius 
volleys and three of these also by quadriceps volleys. Such monosynaptic 
activation by quadriceps is directly opposed to the usual inhibitory action 
which these same group Ia afferent fibres exert on biceps-semitendinosus 
motoneurones. The IPSP revealed in Fig. 12G, H had such a long latent period 
and high threshold that it would have been due to group Ib and II afferent 
impulses. However, in this experiment several other biceps-semitendinosus 
motoneurones at this and other segmental levels were directly inhibited by 
quadriceps group Ia impulses. No trace of aberrant connexions either of 
gastrocnemius or of quadriceps group Ia afferent fibres were detectable in the 


A 1-29 


Fig. 12. As in Fig. 4, but for a motoneurone of the itendinosus-biceps posterior nucleus; 
I, J and K were recorded extracellularly in close proximity to the motoneurone. (Ventral 
roots were cut, so antidromic identification was not possible.) A, Z, J are evoked by volleys 
in the itendi biceps posterior nerve; B, F, J, by gastr soleus nerve; 
C, D, G, H, K, by quadriceps nerve. Depolarizing current applied during F, G and H. 
Strengths of stimulation are indicated relative to the respective thresholds. All intracellular 
traces are at same speed and amplification, as also are the extracellular traces, J, J, K. 


four biceps-semitendinosus motoneurones that were intracellularly investi- 


gated at a region of the spinal cord three millimetres caudal to this abnormal — 


focus, A similar monosynaptic excitation of some biceps-semitendinosus 


motoneurones by group I gastrocnemius volleys has been observed in three. 


other experiments. 

In another experiment on an animal with divided ventral roots a group of 
neurones was encountered which received monosynaptic excitatory action 
from both biceps-semitendinosus and gastrocnemius-soleus. These moto- 
neurones could of course not be identified with certainty, but, since some of 
them received their main monosynaptic innervation from the gastrocnemius- 
soleus muscle, and since there was also a trace of ‘direct’ inhibition from the 
deep peroneal nerve, but not from quadriceps, it is likely that some of them at 


least 
enemi 
the bi 
It i 
inter-¢ 
| a func 
| numb 
the Ai 
theref 
thus 
| B 3-8 5 When 

hymo 
| impo 
muscl 
pariso 
maxir 
the s 
| same 
from 
has b 
| there 
over 
volley 
media 

| It 
Synap 

| from 
im o7 
dispe 


MONOSYNAPTIC EXCITATION OF MOTONEURONES 43 


least belonged to the gastrocnemius-soleus nuclei. In one of them a gastro- 
enemius-soleus volley produced an EPSP of 5-5 mV, as against 4-2 mV from 
the biceps-semitendinosus nerve. 

It is at present not possible to say whether the occasionally encountered 
inter-connexion between biceps-semitendinosus and gastrocnemius-soleus has 
a functional significance or should be classified solely as an aberrancy. In a 
number of cats part of the semitendinosus muscle ends in a tendon which joins 
the Achilles tendon and sometimes this also occurs for biceps femoris. It is 
therefore possible that parts of these muscles may act as an ankle extensor and 
thus be synergic with the gastrocnemius-soleus muscle. as 


DISCUSSION 


When the species of a motoneurone has been determined, as above, it is 
possible to discover if there are distinctive differences between the synaptic 
potentials generated in it by afferent impulses from its own muscle (homo- 
nymous responses) and the synaptic potentials generated by impulses from 
other muscles (heteronymous responses). With monosynaptic EPSP’s it has 
been invariably observed that, apart from differences in size, homonymous 
and heteronymous responses have no distinguishable features. 

This similarity of latent period and time course is best displayed when the 
sizes of the respective afferent volleys are adjusted so that the EPSP’s are 
approximately equal in magnitude. For example in Fig. 4 the homonymous 
(A) and heteronymous (#) EPSP’s are indistinguishable. Furthermore, it is 
important to ensure that the monosynaptic EPSP’s are not distorted by 
responses that are evoked by impulses in the higher threshold fibres in the 
muscle nerves, especially in group Ib fibres; hence, for purposes of this com- 
parison, it is essential to employ stimuli so weak that they are usually sub- 
maximal for the group Ia fibres (cf. Eccles et al. 1957a). For example in Fig. 7 
the submaximal heteronymous EPSP’s (2, G, I and M) are seen to have the 
same time course as the submaximal homonymous EPSP (A), though differing 
from it in size. Similar comparisons may be made between the appropriate 
EPSP’s in Figs. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 11. Usually the homonymous EPSP 
has been larger than that heteronymously evoked from any other nerve, but 
there have been many individual exceptions and several means of ratios are 
over 1-0 in Tables 1B, 3B and 5B, the highest values being observed for 
volleys from the vasti on to crureus motoneurones and volleys a caput 
mediale on to caput laterale and anconeus motoneurones. 

It has been suggested (Lloyd, 1946a; Hunt, 1955) that homonymous 
synaptic activation is specially potent in evoking the discharge of impulses 
from a motoneurone because the synapses are strategically clustered together 
in one or more zones, while heteronymous synapses are more uniforml
