1. Brain Res Rev. 2008 Jan;57(1):172-82. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.07.016. 
Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Initiation of locomotion in lampreys.

Dubuc R(1), Brocard F, Antri M, Fénelon K, Gariépy JF, Smetana R, Ménard A, Le 
Ray D, Viana Di Prisco G, Pearlstein E, Sirota MG, Derjean D, St-Pierre M, 
Zielinski B, Auclair F, Veilleux D.

Author information:
(1)Département de kinanthropologie, Université du Québec à Montréal, Case 
postale 8888, succursale Centre-ville, Montréal, (Québec), Canada H3C 3P8. 
rejean.dubuc@gmail.com

The spinal circuitry underlying the generation of basic locomotor synergies has 
been described in substantial detail in lampreys and the cellular mechanisms 
have been identified. The initiation of locomotion, on the other hand, relies on 
supraspinal networks and the cellular mechanisms involved are only beginning to 
be understood. This review examines some of the findings relative to the neural 
mechanisms involved in the initiation of locomotion of lampreys. Locomotion can 
be elicited by sensory stimulation or by internal cues associated with 
fundamental needs of the animal such as food seeking, exploration, and mating. 
We have described mechanisms by which escape swimming is elicited in lampreys in 
response to mechanical skin stimulation. A rather simple neural connectivity is 
involved, including sensory and relay neurons, as well as the brainstem 
rhombencephalic reticulospinal cells, which act as command neurons. We have 
shown that reticulospinal cells have intrinsic membrane properties that allow 
them to transform a short duration sensory input into a long-lasting excitatory 
command that activates the spinal locomotor networks. These mechanisms 
constitute an important feature for the activation of escape swimming. Other 
sensory inputs can also elicit locomotion in lampreys. For instance, we have 
recently shown that olfactory signals evoke sustained depolarizations in 
reticulospinal neurons and chemical activation of the olfactory bulbs with local 
injections of glutamate induces fictive locomotion. The mechanisms by which 
internal cues initiate locomotion are less understood. Our research has focused 
on one particular locomotor center in the brainstem, the mesencephalic locomotor 
region (MLR). The MLR is believed to channel inputs from many brain regions to 
generate goal-directed locomotion. It activates reticulospinal cells to elicit 
locomotor output in a graded fashion contrary to escape locomotor bouts, which 
are all-or-none. MLR inputs to reticulospinal cells use both glutamatergic and 
cholinergic transmission; nicotinic receptors on reticulospinal cells are 
involved. MLR excitatory inputs to reticulospinal cells in the middle (MRRN) are 
larger than those in the posterior rhombencephalic reticular nucleus (PRRN). 
Moreover at low stimulation strength, reticulospinal cells in the MRRN are 
activated first, whereas those in the PRRN require stronger stimulation 
strengths. The output from the MLR on one side activates reticulospinal neurons 
on both sides in a highly symmetrical fashion. This could account for the 
symmetrical bilateral locomotor output evoked during unilateral stimulation of 
the MLR in all animal species tested to date. Interestingly, muscarinic receptor 
activation reduces sensory inputs to reticulospinal neurons and, under natural 
conditions, the activation of MLR cholinergic neurons will likely reduce sensory 
inflow. Moreover, exposing the brainstem to muscarinic agonists generates 
sustained recurring depolarizations in reticulospinal neurons through 
pre-reticular effects. Cells in the caudal half of the rhombencephalon appear to 
be involved and we propose that the activation of these muscarinoceptive cells 
could provide additional excitation to reticulospinal cells when the MLR is 
activated under natural conditions. One important question relates to sources of 
inputs to the MLR. We found that substance P excites the MLR, whereas GABA 
inputs tonically maintain the MLR inhibited and removal of this inhibition 
initiates locomotion. Other locomotor centers exist such as a region in the 
ventral thalamus projecting directly to reticulospinal cells. This region, 
referred to as the diencephalic locomotor region, receives inputs from several 
areas in the forebrain and is likely important for goal-directed locomotion. In 
summary, this review focuses on the most recent findings relative to initiation 
of lamprey locomotion in response to sensory and internal cues in lampreys.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.07.016
PMID: 17916380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]