1. J Neurophysiol. 1993 Sep;70(3):1102-14. doi: 10.1152/jn.1993.70.3.1102.

Adaptive control for backward quadrupedal walking. III. Stumbling corrective 
reactions and cutaneous reflex sensitivity.

Buford JA(1), Smith JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Science, University of California, Los Angeles 
90024-1568.

1. Four cats were trained to walk backward (BWD) and forward (FWD) on a 
motorized treadmill. Mechanical (taps) or electrical (pulses) stimuli were 
applied to the dorsal or ventral aspect of the hind paw during swing or stance. 
Hindlimb kinematic data, obtained by digitizing 16-mm high-speed film, were 
synchronized with computer-analyzed electromyograms (EMG) recorded from anterior 
biceps femoris (ABF), vastus lateralis (VL), lateral gastrocnemius (LG), 
tibialis anterior (TA), and semitendinosus (ST). Responses to taps and pulses, 
as well as the modulation in cutaneous reflex sensitivity to pulses, were 
described for both walking directions and stimulus locations. 2. After dorsal 
taps that obstructed FWD swing, the hindlimb initially drew back away from the 
obstacle with knee flexion and ST activation, ankle extension with TA 
suppression and LG activation, and hip extension with ABF facilitation. Next, 
the limb was raised over the obstacle with resumed TA activity and enhanced knee 
and ankle flexion, and then compensatory knee and ankle extension positioned the 
limb for the ensuing stance phase. 3. For ventral taps that obstructed BWD 
swing, the initial response also tended to draw the limb away from the obstacle 
with hip and ankle flexion and TA facilitation and reduced knee flexion with 
weak VL facilitation and suppression of ST activity. Next, ST activity resumed 
as knee and ankle flexion raised the limb over the obstacle, and then 
compensatory extension completed the swing phase for BWD walking. Thus the 
initial kinematic and EMG responses to obstacles were opposite for BWD versus 
FWD swing, and these responses were consistent with active avoidance of the 
obstacles. Responses during BWD walking were subtle, however, compared with 
those for FWD. 4. After nonobstructing taps (ventral FWD, dorsal BWD), ST and TA 
activation and knee and ankle flexion were coincident, demonstrating that the 
aforementioned differences in responses to obstructing obstacles were not simply 
location dependent. Regardless of the direction of walking or the location of 
stimulation, taps applied during stance had little immediate kinematic effect, 
but the subsequent swing phase was usually exaggerated, as if the response was 
programmed to avoid any lingering obstacle. 5. Electrical pulses did not elicit 
the full-blown responses typically evoked by taps. The sequencing in activation 
of ST and TA characteristic after laps was absent after pulses, and there were 
rarely dramatic kinematic responses to pulses like those easily elicited by 
taps. There were, in fact, few differences in responses to electrical 
stimulation for BWD versus FWD walking.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1152/jn.1993.70.3.1102
PMID: 8229161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]