--- page 1 ---
308
The Intrinsic Factors in the Act of Progression in the
By T. G raham  B rown .
(Communicated by Prof. C. S. Sherrington, F.R.S. Received July 21, 1911.) 
(From the Physiological Laboratory of the University of Liverpool.)
CONTENTS.
PAGE
I. Introduction .............................................................................................. 308
II. Operative Procedure................................................................................... 312
III. Movements of Progression in the Low Spinal Preparation in which
the Muscles are not De-afferented ................................................... 313
IV. Movements of Progression in the Low Spinal Preparation in which
the Muscles are De-afferented ........................................................... 314
Y. Conclusions.................................................................................................. 316
YI. Summary .................................................................................................. 319
I. Introduction.
Whilst the act of progression is being performed, the several limbs 
exhibit rhythmic movements of flexion and of extension. When any limb 
is in contact with the ground, it extends, and thus serves to propel the 
animal forwards. At the end of this act the limb is lifted from the ground 
by a movement of flexion, is carried forward, and finally is again placed 
upon the ground to repeat the cycle. During these phasic acts the dynamic 
balance of the neural centres is disturbed by two different kinds of peripheral 
stimuli.
In the first place, the discontinuous contact with the ground, and the 
synchronous distortion of the skin of the foot—determined by the weight of 
the animal then carried in part by that limb—produce changes in the 
activity of exteroceptive end-organs therein embedded, and discontinuous 
augmentations and diminutions of the stimuli originated in them.
In the second place, the backward and forward movements of the limb, 
and the activity of the muscles which execute them, produce changes in the 
state of the proprioceptive organs situated in the muscles, joints, and 
tendons which take part in the act.
The act of progression is one richly co-ordinated. Yet it has long been 
known that movements of the hind limbs, certainly those of progression, 
may be present in the “ late spinal animal.'’ A mechanism confined to the 
lumbar part of the spinal cord is therefore sufficient to determine in the 
hind limbs an act of progression, which is probably very nearly a normal 
one. As reflex movements of the hind limb, exactly similar to movements
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 2 ---
Intrinsic Factors in the Act of Progression in the Mammal.  309
integrated in the act of progression, may be obtained by the artificial 
stimulation of exteroceptive or of proprioceptive end-organs, the suggestion 
has naturally arisen that the act of progression may be entirely determined 
by cyclic variations of the stimuli which arise in peripheral sense organs, 
and are themselves conditioned by the movements which they engender
_in other words, that the act of progression is automatic and conditioned by
the integration of reflex movements which follow each other successively, 
and each of which determines the stimulus which calls the following 
movement into being.
In discussing the nature of progression, Philippson* has laid stress upon 
the stimulation of the skin as a factor in the determination of the act. 
Before this, Sherringtonf had observed that in the spinal dog and cat, 
the ipsilateral flexion reflex may be evoked, soon after the trans-section, 
by pressure so directed upwards upon the pads of the foot that the toe-joints 
are extended—the stimulus being comparable to the pressure of the ground 
in progression. But later, when the shock of the operation has passed, the 
same stimulus will evoke the ipsilateral extension reflex—the “ extensor 
thrust”—if the stimulated limb be in a state of flexion. If it be extended, 
the reaction is one of flexion as before. Philippson believes that this reflex 
plays an important part in the mechanism and determination of progression. 
He supposes that the first contact of the limb with the ground evokes the 
extensor thrust. This reaction is reinforced by the crossed extension which 
accompanies the flexion of the opposite limb. These two determine an 
increase of pressure of the foot upon the ground, and this peripheral 
exteroceptive stimulus then causes a reflex flexion of the same limb and an 
extension of the opposite limb, which then is about to come, in its turn, into 
contact with the ground. The former limb is now flexed and carried 
forward while the latter is in contact with the ground, and the stretching of 
the skin thus caused in the inguinal region determines the appearance of 
extension in the flexed limb. This extension brings the limb on to the 
ground, where the contact determines the extensor thrust. And so the cycle 
begins again. On this hypothesis, it is, however, difficult to explain the 
mechanism of Freusberg’s* “ mark-time ” reflex. There the “ late spinal ” 
dog, when suspended free from the ground, performs movements of pro­
gression with its hind limbs. Philippson thinks that here the crossed 
extension due to the ipsilateral flexion, combined with the inguinal stretching
* ‘ L’autonomie et la centralisation dans le systeme nerveux des animaux,’ Bruxelles, 
1905.
t ‘ Roy. Soc. Proc.,’ 1900, vol. 66, p. 66.
X ‘ Arch. f. d. ges. Physiol.,’ 1874, vol. 9, p. 358.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 3 ---
310 Mr. Graham Brown. Intrinsic Factors in the  [July 21,
■of the skin and with the action of association paths in the lumbar cord, are 
sufficient to produce the phenomenon in the absence of contact with the 
ground.
The difficulty in explaining this phenomenon has been emphasised by- 
Sherrington.* He points out that, in the intact animal (cat, dog), severance 
of all the sensory nerve trunks directly distributed to all four feet up to and 
above the wrists and ankles scarcely impairs the act of progression. He also 
notes that reflex stepping is not annulled, or even obviously impaired, by 
severance of all the various cutaneous nerves of the limb. And stretching 
of the prominent fold of skin which runs along the outer edge of the groin 
cannot be of essential importance in the act, because cocainisation of this 
region does not interfere with reflex stepping. The extensor thrust may 
also be abolished—by that division of the sensory nerves of the foot 
described above—without noticeably changing the acts of the walk and 
trot. He therefore concludes that the intrinsic stimuli for reflex stepping 
of the limb are not referable to any part of the skin of the limb.
In continuation of his work on proprioceptive reflexes,f Sherrington finds 
in the sensory end-organs of the muscles themselves the seat of the intrinsic 
stimuli for reflex stepping.* He considers that the mode of process in 
reflex walking is as follows : The spinal step is a rhythmic reflex which may 
be excited by continuous stimuli applied either to the cross-section of the 
divided spinal cord or to various peripheral points outside the limb itself. 
The generating stimulus is continuous, but the movement of the limb is 
determined by the alternate action of two antagonistic reflexes. The 
primary stimulus sets one of these in action. This act generates in that 
limb a proprioceptive reflex antagonistic to itself. The proprioceptive reflex 
interrupts the primary reflex, and in this interruption abolishes the stimulus 
which engendered itself. The primary reflex is then reconstituted and 
again calls forth the interrupting reflex, and so on. The secondary reflex is 
determined by the combination of three main factors—centripetal impulses 
from the deep structures moved passively by the primary reflex (joints, etc.); 
centripetal impulses from the muscles which move actively in the primary 
reflex ; and the central change underlying “ rebound.” The phenomenon of 
“ reflex reversal ” and the “ extensor thrust ” may also play a part.
Of particular significance is this factor of “ central rebound.” Sherrington§ *  *  *  §
* ‘ Journ. Physiol.,’ 1910, vol. 40, p. 28.
t ‘ Boy. Soc. Proc.,’ B, 1908, vol. 80, p. 552 ; ‘ Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1909, vol. 2, 
p. 109.
f ‘Journ. Physiol.,’ 1910, vol. 40, p. 28.
§ ‘Eoy. Soc. Proc.,’ B, 1905, vol. 76, p. 160 ; ‘Eoy. Soc. Proc.,’ B, 1906, vol. 77, p. 478.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 4 ---
Act of Progression Mammal. 3111911.]
has noted that the flexion reflex, for instance, is often terminated after 
cessation of the exciting stimulus by an active phase of extension; and that 
the individual muscles which are in a state of inhibition during the applica­
tion of the stimulus contract suddenly after its termination. That this 
phenomenon is not due to a proprioceptive stimulus generated in the muscles 
which take part in that primary flexion reflex—or at any rate is not solely 
conditioned by such a stimulus—is shown by Sherrington’s observation* 
that the rebound contraction—“ successive spinal induction ”—may be 
obtained in the de-afferented preparation.
Another point of interest and importance is the partial similarity of the 
act of progression with that of the scratch. Sherringtonf has noted this 
similarity, and the present author^ has shewn that in the anaesthetised 
rabbit the one state may immediately follow upon the other, and that there 
is indication in some cases that the two may blend for a time. This partial 
similarity is suggestive. Sherrington^ found that in the scratch-reflex the 
flexion of the thigh did riot completely relapse during each brief extension of 
the phasic act—that there was always a certain amount of maintained 
flexion. In certain states, as the present author|| was able to shew for the 
guinea-pig, the two factors in the scratch may be separated. And of these 
two factors one is a state of maintained flexion while the other is a dis­
continuous inhibition of that state. In the scratching phenomenon described 
by the present author^ as occurring in the guinea-pig under anaesthesia there 
is an alternation of the state of scratching from one hind limb to the other. 
At any one time the state of maintained flexion complicated by rhythmic 
inhibition is accompanied in the crossed hind limb by a state of maintained 
inhibition of flexion. He has suggested that the rhythmic inhibition 
during maintained flexion and the maintained inhibition of flexion which 
immediately succeeds in the same hind limb may be expressions of one and 
the same activity ; and that they may, in effect, be conditioned by variations 
in the mutual influence of interacting spinal centres. The suggestion in 
reality is that the locus of the inhibitory factor is central, and that it is not 
of essential peripheral origin from proprioceptive stimuli. For the scratch 
this is in accordance with a previous observation of Sherrington** that the
* ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1909, vol. 2, p. 109.
t ‘ Journ. Physiol.,’ 1910, vol. 40, p. 28.
+ ‘Q- Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1911, vol. 4, p. 151.
§ ‘Journ. Physiol.,’ 1906, vol. 34, p. 1.
|| ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1910, vol. 3, p. 21 ; ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1911, vol. 4, 
p. 19.
IF ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1910, vol. 3, p. 21.
** ‘ Journ. Physiol.,’ 1906, vol. 34, p. 1.
VOL. LXXXIV.— B. 2 A
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 5 ---
312 Mr. Graham Brown. Intrinsic Factors in the [July 21,
de-afferented hind limb of the cat may be made to scratch. Although this is 
perhaps not conclusive—in view of the possible influence of stimuli which 
arise in the opposite hind limb—he and the present author have recently 
demonstrated at a meeting of the Physiological Society a cat in which 
scratching may be elicited although both hind limbs have been completely 
de-afferented.
The phasic alternation of maintained flexion in the scratching phenomenon 
of the guinea-pig under anaesthesia in many ways resembles the phasic 
alternation of flexion in the act of progression, and has suggested for some 
time to the present author that the act of progression may, too, be essentially 
a central and not a peripheral phenomenon.
II. Operative Procedure.
In these experiments the animal used was the decerebrate cat, and the 
movements of the isolated tibialis a n t i c and gastrocnemius were recorded. 
Before decerebration a loose ligature was placed round the spinal cord at the 
level of the 11th, 12th, or 13th pair of thoracic spinal roots; and all the 
posterior spinal roots caudal to, and including, the 6th lumbar root were 
divided upon the side of the recording muscles. In the limb of that side all 
the other muscles were put out of action by the severance of their motor 
nerves or of their substance; there remained in action only the muscles 
supplied by the branches of the popliteal nerves in the leg, and these, besides 
having their tendons cut, were de-afferented by the section of the lumbar roots. 
The long saphenus nerve, a purely afferent one, was left intact for another 
purpose. In the opposite hind limb all the muscles were de-afferented by 
the section of their nerves or by the section of their substance; there remained 
of the nerves of that limb only the long saphenus nerve.
In effect this procedure completely de-afferented the two hind limbs, 
including the muscles whose movements were to be recorded.
To record the muscular movements the leg was firmly fixed in steel clamps, 
and the recording muscles wrote upon the myograph by means of light 
aluminium levers to which their tendons were attached by threads.
An interval of about five hours was allowed to elapse between the 
end of the operative procedure described above and the experiment about to 
be described.
It is hardly necessary to state that up to the time of decerebration the 
animal was kept completely under the influence of the anaesthetic.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 6 ---
1911.] Act of Progression in 313
III. Movements of Progression in the Loiv Sinned Preparation in which the 
Muscles are not
Before passing to the consideration of the movements of progression in 
de-afferented muscles it is well to examine briefly the movements which 
occur in the same preparation when the muscles have not been de-afferented. 
The procedure of operation was that described above, with the exception that 
the lumbar posterior spinal roots were not divided.
When such a decerebrate preparation is rendered a low spinal preparation 
by the rapid severance of the spinal cord at or about the level of the 12th 
thoracic segment the recording muscles shew movements undoubtedly those 
of progression.
Three periods may be distinguished in typical instances of the reaction thus 
evoked as movement at the ankle.
Immediately after the section of the cord there is a period during 
which the flexor muscle, tibiedis anticus, remains more or less in a state 
of maintained contraction. The maintenance of this contraction is not perfect. 
There are usually phases of incomplete relaxation. These become more 
frequent and more complete towards the end of this period, and at its 
termination the relaxation phases are complete but rather irregular in rhythm. 
During the first period the extensor, gastrocnemius, plays little part, and may 
exhibit no movement at all. Towards the end gastrocnemius begins to exhibit 
movements synchronous with the relaxations of tibialis anticus.
In the second period the movements of the antagonistic muscles are very 
regular and alternate. The flexor record demonstrates regular phases of 
contraction separated by regular phases in which the muscle remains relaxed. 
The extensor record exhibits contractions of the muscle synchronous with the 
relaxation phases of tibialis anticus. These contractions are of rapid initiation 
and short duration. They seem to commence at the moment in which the 
movement of the flexor changes from contraction to relaxation, and they 
resemble the “ extensor rebound ” observed after the cessation of a state of 
extensor inhibition.
In the third period of the reaction the movements of the flexor become 
smaller in extent and appear at greater intervals of time. There is a change 
in the type of movement of the extensor. The extensor record changes 
completely in appearance. The muscle tends to remain in a state of con­
traction, and this is broken by phases of relaxation which are synchronous 
with, but commence before, the contractions of the flexor.
This third period of the reaction is the terminal one. The movements of 
the flexor cease. The extensor remains in a state of contraction, still, however,
2 A 2
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 7 ---
complicated by phases of relaxation. These finally cease, and the reaction 
terminates with the extensor in a condition of maintained and unbroken 
contraction.
IY. Movements of Progression in the Low Spinal Preparation which the
Muscles arc D
When the spinal cord is severed in the same manner in the de-afferented 
preparation movements of progression may be obtained, and these are similar 
to the movements observed in the preparation in which the afferent nerves 
of the recording muscles are intact.
In the record illustrated (see figure) the cord was cut approximately at the 
point marked X in the figure on the signal line below (X, X also on the two 
tracings). The first period lasts approximately up to the ordinates marked 1. 
The upper tracing shews a state of maintained flexion broken by more or less 
incomplete relaxations of short duration. The contraction of gastrocnemius 
shewn in the lower tracing is unusual. The second period lasts approximately 
up to the ordinates marked 8. The acts of flexion and extension are very regular. 
Examination of the ordinates 4, 5, G, and 7 shews that the commencement of 
flexion is accompanied by gastrocnemius relaxation; the change from con­
traction to relaxation at the top of the tibialis anticus “ beat ” is accompanied 
by a contraction of gastrocnemius; this does not last up to the point at which 
flexion recommences. This contraction of gastrocnemius strongly resembles 
the contraction of “ rebound.” The third period commences at or about the 
point marked by ordinates 8, and persists up to the end of the record. 
After the contraction of gastrocnemius marked by ordinates 9, the curve 
begins to rise slowly. This is broken by a relaxation which commences 
before the tibialis contraction marked by ordinates 10. This flexion move­
ment is small, and is not accompanied^at its change to relaxation by a con­
traction of gastrocnemius. Thenceforth the gastrocnemius tracing exhibits 
only periods of relaxation synchronous with the tibialis contractions, and no 
rebound contraction. After ordinates 12 the gastrocnemius remains in 
maintained contraction.
The records thus shew the same threfe periods observed in afferent-present 
reactions.
In the first period the maintained contraction of the flexor muscle com­
plicated by more or less incomplete phases of relaxation—is present. This 
at first has sometimes been accompanied by little or no movement of the 
extensor; in other cases this latter movement has been present.
The second period seems to be characterised by a greater regularity than is 
usual in preparations in which the afferent arcs are unbroken. The movement
314 Mr. Graham Brown. Intrinsic Factors  [July 21,
I
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 8 ---
Tiliialis
anticus.
Gastro­
cnemius.
S
|
§
Signal.
Seconds
F ig . 1.—Decerebrate cat, June 19, 1911. Recording muscles de-afferented, and all others de-afferented and paralysed. Record of movements of 
progression as evidenced in tibialis anticus (upper tracing) and gastrocnemius (lower tracing) upon cutting the cord completely across between the 
levels of origin of the twelfth and thirteenth pair of thoracic spinal roots. The cord was cut six and a half hours after the decerebration. In the 
tracings the rise of the curve denotes contraction, the fall relaxation ; the record is to be read from left to right; seconds are marked below ; 
ordinates, marked 1, 2, 3, etc., mark corresponding points in the two tracings ; and millimetre scales have been reduced in proportion with the record.
315
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 9 ---
of the extensor is strongly reminiscent of rebound contraction. It does not 
persist for the whole of the duration of the synchronous flexor relaxation, 
but relaxes soon. There is then sometimes an additional relaxation 
synchronous with the contraction of the flexor. The termination of this 
flexor contraction is then succeeded by the extensor contraction—and so on.
In the third period of the reaction the rebound-like contraction of the 
extensor disappears and is replaced by a condition of maintained contraction 
which' is broken by relaxations synchronous with the flexor contractions. 
These are much smaller than before and gradually disappear. The transition 
of the type of flexor contractions is sometimes sudden. The period finally 
ends with a maintained and unbroken contraction of the extensor.
It may be said that there is no great difference between the movements of 
progression as evidenced in the de-afferented muscles and those not 
de-afferented. The greater regularity of the movements as observed in the 
former preparation may possibly be due to the absence of the peripheral 
part of the mechanism. But it is also possible that the difference is an 
accidental one; for records as regular have been obtained from the 
preparation in which the muscles are not de-afferented, although the average 
regularity is less.
V. Conclusions.
These experiments show that the phasing of the, acts of progression is  
determined neither by the peripheral skin stimuli nor by the self-generated  
proprioceptive stimuli of the muscles which take part them.
The section of the spinal cord generates an arrhythmic stimulus. This 
causes the contraction of certain limb muscles. In the preparation used, of 
these the recording muscles are the only mobile parts of the two limbs. The 
characteristic alternating contraction of the two antagonists cannot be 
determined by their own contraction and the consequent setting up of 
a series of refractory phases in the activity of the centres by means of the 
stimulation of a sensory apparatus contained in the muscles, because the 
afferent nerves which arise in these muscles were put out of action in the 
preparation used. Not only must the locus of the changes which condition 
the refractory phase of progression be in the spinal cord, but the mechanism 
which determines them must also be centred.
There are, therefore, two points of interest in connection with the 
mechanism of progression—the question of the nature of the central changes 
in activity, and the question of the part played in the act by the pro­
prioceptive mechanism. The stimuli which arise in the skin probably play 
but a small part in the act, and then are of importance only in certain of its 
types and not in all.
316 Mr. Graham Brown. Intrinsic Factors the  [July 21,
if
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 10 ---
Act of Progression in the Mammal. 3171911.]
The evidence given by the records throws some light upon the problem 
of the nature of the central activities. In a typical example there is first a 
period in which a state of maintained flexion, although a broken one, is the 
predominant feature. The terminating period of the reaction is one 
characterised by maintained extension—at the end unbroken. Between 
these there lies a period in which the phasing of the act is most perfect. 
This period—lying as it does intermediate between those of maintained 
flexion and of maintained extension—may be regarded as a period of 
balance.
Any hypothesis regarding the nature of the central activities must at 
present be tentative, but this appearance of “ balance ” supports a view put 
forward by the author in previous papers.* As. regards the act of pro­
gression the central mechanism may be regarded as consisting of antagonistic 
centres. In one hind limb it may be supposed that the one of these 
determines a state of maintained flexion and a concomitant state of 
maintained inhibition of extension, while the other determines a state of 
maintained extension and a concomitant state of inhibition of flexion. It 
is inessential at present whether the lumbar centres are two in number and 
situate in opposite sides, of the spinal cord; or whether they are four in 
number and situated in antagonistic pairs on each side of the cord; or 
whether they are more than four in number.f All that it is desired to 
insist upon here and-now is that the centres are paired, and that each pair 
consists of antagonistic opposites.
If this be granted, and if there be presumed some such state as “ fatigue ” 
—in its broadest sense—accompanying the expression of activity of either 
of the antagonistic centres, it is possible to frame a tentative hypothesis 
of the nature of the central changes which condition the phasic act of 
progression.
It may then be supposed that some neural disturbance rearranges the 
conditions of activity of the antagonistic centres in such a manner as to 
destroy their balance. The one centre then expresses its activity in a 
movement—for example, flexion—of the limb, and at the same time inhibits 
the activity of its antagonistic centre. But this expression of activity is 
accompanied by a state of “ fatigue,” which progresses in extent and tends 
to restore the balance of the centres. At the same time the inhibition of
* ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,' 1910, vol. 3, p. 21 ^ ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1911, vol. 4, 
p. 19.
t For instance, there may be antagonistic factors (contraction and relaxation producing) 
in one and the same centre. Thus the activity of such a centre as that for tibialis 
anticus might be exhibited either as contraction or as relaxation of the muscle.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 11 ---
318 Mr. Graham Brown. Intrinsic Factors in the  [July 21,
the other centre by the first decreases in efficiency. The point then arrives 
when the second centre is no longer inhibited efficiently. But there is then 
following upon the inhibitory depression an exaltation of its activity— 
“ rebound.” The balance is therefore not only regained but overshot. The 
exhibition of activity by the second centre then determines the contraction 
of the antagonistic group of muscles, and at the same time there is an 
inhibition of the activity of the first centre. The “ fatigue ” which 
accompanies this activity of the second centre then sets in. The balance is 
restored, but again overshot. And so the act proceeds.
The phenomenon of rebound, which Sherrington* has shewn to be of 
central locus, may play a very important part in the swinging of balance 
between the spinal centres. And the phenomena which underlie the phasic 
act of progression may be likened to the beating of a pendulum. The 
activity exhibited may remain for a time flexion, may then swing back to 
the neutral point of spinal balance, but may overshoot this and become 
extension activity, may then swing back past the neutral point into flexion 
activity—and so on.
There remains the question of the part played by the proprioceptive 
mechanism in the act.
There can be no question of its importance nor of its suitability to 
augment the central mechanism. It cannot, however, be regarded as 
determining the refractory phases in the act. Its part must be regulative, 
not causative.
A purely central mechanism of progression ungraded by proprioceptive 
stimuli would clearly be inefficient in determining the passage of an animal 
through an uneven environment. Across a plain of perfect evenness the 
central mechanism of itself might drive an animal with precision. Or it 
might be efficient, for instance, in the case of an elephant charging over 
ground of moderate unevenness. But it alone would make impossible the 
fine stalking of a cat over rough ground. In such a case each step may be 
somewhat different to all others, and eacli must be graded to its conditions 
if the whole progression of the animal is to be efficient. The hind limb, 
which at one time is somewhat more extended in its posture as it is in 
contact with the ground, in another step may be more flexed. But the 
forward thrust it gives as its contribution to the passage of the animal must 
be of a comparatively uniform degree in each consecutive step. It may only 
be so if it is graded by the posture of the limb when in contact with the 
ground, and by the duration of its contact with the ground. This grading 
can only be brought about by peripheral stimuli. Of these we must regard 
* ‘Q. Journ. Exp. Physiol.,’ 1909, vol. 3, p. 109.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 

--- page 12 ---
Act of Progression the Mammal. 3191911.]
the proprioceptive stimuli from the muscles themselves as the most impor­
tant, and the part which they play is essentially regulative—not
causative.
This work has been done during the tenure of a Carnegie Fellowship, 
and the expenses of the research have been defrayed by a grant from the 
Carnegie Trust.
Summary.
1. By means of a stimulus (namely, section of the spinal cord) central in 
application, although remote from the local centre, the act of progression 
may be induced in muscles de-afferented by the cutting of their appropriate 
posterior spinal roots. It occurs thus after all the muscles of both hind 
limbs have been de-afferented, and all but the recording pair have been put 
out of action by motor paralysis.
2. The act of progression as exhibited by these muscles and thus induced 
scarcely differs, if indeed it differs at all, from the act similarly induced 
when the afferent arcs of the recording muscles have not been broken.
3. In either case the reaction, as evidenced in movement at the ankle- 
joint, shews three periods. In the first the record is characterised by a state 
chiefly of maintained flexion. In the last there is a state characterised by 
maintained extension. Intermediate between these there is a period of 
“ balancQ,” in which the movements of progression are most perfect.
4. The rhythmic sequence of the act of progression is consequently determined
by phasic changes innate in the local centres, and these phases are not essentially  
caused by peripheral stimuli.
5. The proprioceptive stimuli which arc generated by the contraction of
muscles taking part in the act  ( when the spinal roots are
intact) play a regulating and, not an intrinsic part the Their chief
importance may be in the grading of the individual component movements to  
the temporary exigencies of the environment.
 Downloaded from https://royalsocietypublishing.org/ on 01 October 2024 
