equently the flexion is broken at first by a few brief 
irregular extensions especially at elbow. 

Under these stimuli and in these forms the flexion-reflex is 
evidently protective. It is often accompanied by stepping of the 
crossed hind-limb and, though less commonly, of the other limbs as well, 
but not of the limb itself stimulated. The irritated foot is withdrawn 
from harm and the other legs run away. The protective reflex is 
associated with a flight-reflex. The dog kept under observation by 
Goltz subsequent to ablation almost entire of both cerebral hemispheres 
was noted after incidental injury to one hind foot to keep the injured 
foot off the ground and run on three legs. Goltz’s interpretation of 
that “behaviour” as largely reflex is borne out by the above mentioned 
less complete yet broadly analogous reaction in the decapitate prepara- 
tion (eat). The decerebrate rabbit shows a similar reaction, except 
that in the rabbit while the stimulated limb is kept flexed the other 
three legs show the hopping movement more usual to the natural 


1 Of. in the donkey, Chauveau, Brain, uv. 173. 1891. 


4 ‘4 
* 
4 
| 
E 
*é 
q 
7 
4 
‘ 


72 C. S SHERRINGTON. 
progression of that animal. In the decerebrate preparation (cat) the 


reaction shows in addition to the limb movements, a turning sideways 
and backward of the head, an opening of the mouth, retraction of the 
lips, and occasionally vocalisation. The significance of this pseudo- 
affective reflex is clearly related to the nocuous quality of the stimulus. 
There is a reflex combination of movements of protection signifying 
both flight and preparation for defence. 

This reflex is elicitable from all points of a large area of the limb 
surface and also though less easily from the deep structures as well 
(v. supra, Sect. 1 p. 35). But from the deep structures of the limb certain 
stimuli which are not nocuous can evoke reflex flexion. This latter 
reflex flexion is not a movement of | 
withdrawal of the limb out of harm’s 
way but is the flexion phase of the ö ö 
alternating reflex act of stepping. 

The above described maintained 
flexion- reflex excited by nocuous 
stimuli applied to the limb itself 
is therefore not the only form of 
flexion-reflex exhibited by the limb. 
And its sub-variety mentioned above 
as showing some brief and irregular 
discontinuity in the flexion is of 
interest as indicating a transitional 
form toward the rhythmic flexion- 
reflex of. the step. But the noci- 
ceptive flexion-reflex of the limb 
and the rhythmic locomotor flexion- 
reflex of the limb are, as is obvious 
from their significance to the in- 
dividual reactions, mutually incom- 
patible. Hence the nociceptive 
flexion-reflex can interfere with, 
break through and interrupt the 
rhythmic locomotor flexion-reflex 
(Fig. 9). The peculiar character, Fig. 9. Reflex stepping of hind-limb in- 
in fact the “adequacy,” of its terrupted by a nociceptive stimulus 
stimulus lies in intensity. It is 


flexion- reflex. Decapitate prepara- 
prepotent when pitted against the tion pags of lever = flexion. 


Integrative Action of Nervous System, p. 281. 


. 
2 
3 
4 
4 
— 
* 
{ * 
„ 
q 
— ‘ 
* 
* 
4 
. * * — 


LIMB REFLEXES. 73 


locomotor reflex: and this is a further mark of its nociceptive character, 
since nociceptive reflexes like painful sensations are habitually 
“dominant” in competition against others. 


Il. SrI NAL 


1. From the decapitated preparation (cat) reflex stepping of the 
limb can be readily evoked. As to the reflex being really that of 
stepping there is no doubt, and other facts known of stepping as a 
reflex act make it not surprising that the decapitate preparation 
should exhibit it. After spinal transection in the thoracic region 
when the period of shock is passed the hind-limbs of the dog execute 
stepping movements strikingly complete. Photographic kinetoscope 
analysis of the outward character of these movements establishes the 
fidelity of their resemblance to those of the natural step (Pbilippson)!. 
Usually the spinal stepping is that of walk or trot, sometimes it is that 
of the gallop (Philippson)*. Occasionally the decapitate cat also 
shows the gallop; the decapitate rabbit does so more frequently. 

The ordinary stepping movement of hind-limb may be briefly 
described as exhibiting two phases. In one the limb suspended from 
pelvis is brought forward above the ground to a new point of support 
in front of that which it last used. In this phase the limb carries its 
own weight only, and even for that, conditions non-vital, e.g. atmospheric 
pressure on hip-joint (Weber), largely obviate the strain from falling 
upon muscle. Then follows a phase in which, while the foot presses on 
the ground, the limb is extended, carrying its own weight and a share 
of the superincumbent body weight, and finally aids the advance of the 
body by a propulsive thrust from the ground. Thus the stepping in 
each limb is a rhythmic movement of alternating flexion and extension. 
The salient features of this movement in the walk and trot (cat, dog) may 
be summarised thus“. 

i. Flexion phase, during which the anterior angle between thigh 
and ilio-ischial* line continually decreases owing to flexion at hip. 
During the earlier two-thirds of this phase flexion at knee and ankle 
proceeds along with the hip-flexion. In the latest third the angles at 


1 Travaux du Lab. de Physiol., Instituts Solvay. Bruxelles, vu. 2. 5. 1905. 

2 Ibid. 

Of. the kinematograms from Prof. Mareys Station physologigue, Pari, published in 
Philippson’s paper, op. cit. 1905. 

* Defined above, Sect. 1, p. 42. 


* 
* 
. 
7 
. 
~ re 
* 1 
7 


14 0. & SHERRINGTON. 


knee and ankle begin to open. During part of this phase the toes are 
somewhat spread and extended (dorsal flexion) on metatarsus. During 
the whole of this phase the foot is off the ground. 

ii. Extension phase, during which the anterior angle between thigh 
and ilio-ischial line gradually opens, and the angles at knee and ankle 
also open (except for a transient yield under the weight of the body! in 
the earliest third of the phase). During this phase, except at its extreme 
end, the foot is on the ground; at the extreme end of the phase, after the 
foot leaves the ground, the toes are adducted together and plantar-flexed 
on metatarsus. 

iii, At end of flexion phase there is an anterior turning point 
when hip flexing changes to hip extending. At end of extension phase 
there is a posterior turning point when extension of limb changes to 
flexion. 

iv. Synchronism of extension phase in one limb with flexion phase 
in opposite fellow limb; in other words, synchronism of anterior turning 
point of one limb with posterior turning point of the other. 

These main features of the normal step of the hind-limb characterise 
also-the reflex stepping of the limb in the spinal preparation. They are 
main items calling for examination in the analysis of the neural taxis of 
the reflex step. 
| 2. Stimuli for stepping-reflec. 

Remote. Among the stimulations which excite stepping movement 
of the limb in the decapitate preparation are certain of cutaneous 
application and nociceptive character. The most effective loci for 
these are as follows: perineum especially at scrotum or near vulva; 
a foot not that of the limb itself exhibiting the stepping movement; 
neck or back, tail, and pinna when this has been preserved in 
performing the decapitation. The stimulus may be simply rubbing or 
squeezing the skin, or the affixing to it of a small clip, or the 
faradisation or ligation of an exposed nerve. Although cutaneous 
stimulation of that limb which itself exhibits the stepping is not 
y-svocative of the reflex in that limb during the stimulation, on the 
cessation of the stimulus reflex stepping of that limb may follow. And 
occasionally stimulation of the skin of the limb near its base excites 
stepping in it. The stepping evoked by stimulation of perineum or of 
pubic skin just in front of vulva is always bipedal. It might be thought 
that this stepping is bipedal because stimuli applied to the mid line of 

? Philippson. Op. cit. p. 17. 


17 
* 
& 
- 
* 
* 
a 
‘ 
* 
4 
1 
a 
> 
po 
1 
* 
a 
1 
* 
4] 
& 


. LIMB REFLEX 75 


body may excite both right and left nerve-afferents together at their 
overlap in mid-ventral line. But the reflex is still. bipedal when the 
stimulus is shifted well to one side of the mid line, and also when the 
afferent nerves of one side have been severed. Under these latter 
circumstances the reflex stepping begins with flexion in ipsilateral limb 
and with extension in contralateral. In all cases the stepping of the 
two limbs is synchronous in tempo and of opposite phase in right and 
left lirabs. | 

But stimuli to the skin of the limb itself elsewhere than at its 
extreme base excite unipedal stepping of the crossed limb and in the 
stimulated limb itself the maintained flexion reflex, and when the limb 
is already stepping a stimulus to its own skin actually stops the 
stepping replacing it by maintained flexion (the nociceptive reflex) 
(Fig. 9). The cutaneous nociceptive stimuli which excite stepping are 
as regards their seat of application “remote,” i.. situate outside the 
limb itself. And in their case the significance of the reflex stepping 
is clearly protective, the protective act being flight. 

Intrinsic: But other stimuli which are non-nocuous and have 
their seat in the limb itself can evoke reflex stepping of the limb. 
And in fact in using the spinal limb itself for starting and controlling 
its stepping the observer has recourse not to skin stimuli but to passive 
movements. A sure way of eliciting the reflex stepping of the spinal 
hind-limbs (dog, “late spinal” preparation) is the lifting of the animal 
from the ground with spine vertical and hind-limbs pendent. The reflex 
stepping immediately sets in and continues for long periods at a time. 
This mancuvre evokes the reflex even so soon as a couple of weeks 
after thoracic spinal transection. Later when the reflex is better 
developed it occurs with spine horizontal as well as with spine vertical. 
Extension at both hips is a condition favouring the reflex and the 
passive hip-extension is greater with spine vertical. With spine 
vertical when one limb, eg. right, hangs freely under its own weight and 
the other, left, is supported by the observer's finger with hip semiflexed, 
both limbs usually remain quiet and there is no stepping. On then 
removi. g the support and allowing the left thigh to drop into passive 
extension a transient active extension seems to ensue with the falling 
of the limb and on the limb’s reaching its fuller extension there 
follows an active flexion at hip, knee and ankle. This is succeeded by 
extension partially active, to be fullowed again by active flexion, and so 
on. Thus the stepping-reflex commences and proceeds. But it is at 
once arrested by passively supporting one thigh in semiflexion. 


a 
* 
* 
* 
— 
Li 
* 2 — 7 * = 


70 SHERRINGTON. 


be reflex-stepping thus proprioceptively excited is bilateral. At the 
first dropping of the limb (left) reflex flexion sets in in the opposite 
hip; and this occurs so immediately that the left limb has not nearly 
reached its full extension when active flexion is obvious at the right 
hip. And when the left limb after its extension flexes, right limb 
having completed its flexion extends. The reflex is therefore bilateral 
with opposite phase in the opposite limbs. 

In this experiment the passive extension of hip and knee under the 
limb’s own weight evidently provides the stimulus, Passive extension 
of ankle or knee alone or together but without hip does not suffice to 
start the stepping, although frequently exciting extension of contra- 
lateral knee without hip. Passive full extension of one hip alone, knee 
and ankle being even flexed, evokes reflex extension of opposite hip and 
limb. Stretching psoas muscle in the decerebrate preparation some- 
times evokes extension of crossed knee. The inference is that in 
starting the reflex stepping by allowing one limb to drop under its own 
weight the stimulus is mainly due to extension of hip. yee 

Evidently passive movements of the limb can excite from it its 
reflex step or at least can initiate that reflex. And the reflex when 
once started either by a passive movement or by one of the remote 
skin stimuli above mentioned shows like the scratch-reflex a tendency 
to continue, as if the movement of the stepping or scratching limb 
constituted to some extent an intrinsic stimulus in the limb itself 
further promoting and maintaining the reflex. Reinforcements of 
action in this way is not uncommon in complex reflex acts. Thus in the 
scratch-reflex the neck stimulus not only causes a flexion of ipsilateral 
hip but a turning of neck to ipsilateral side, and this turning of neck 
itself excites reflex-flexion of ipsilateral hip. Local proprioceptive 
stimulation as a factor in the reflex is further shown by the prompt 

arrest of the reflex by gentle restraint applied to the moving limb itself. 
| What are the receptors in the limb which movements of the limb 
excite? The limb receptors belong to the two categories exteroceptive 
and proprioceptive. The former are broadly speaking those of the 
skin, the latter belong broadly speaking to musculo-articular and deep 
fascial sttuctures. 

It might have been supposed that the main stimulus for the reflex 
step would arise in the planta from contact with the ground. Facts 
argue, however, against this somewhat natural suggestion. 

A light harmless stimulus, a touch, on the planta does it is true 
evoke in the spinal hind-limb a lifting and slight spreading of the toes 


> — * 
— 
7 
2 
* 
* 
f 
* 
7 
* — 
] 
* 
* 
> 
* 
* * 


. LIMB REFLEXES. 77 


and slight dorso-flexion of ankle. But this movement of the toes and 
ankle is often a conspicuous feature of the reflex step when the dog is 
supported free from the ground and the reflex stepping of the spinal 
hind-limbs taking place in the air. Moreover in the intact animal (cat, 
dog) severance of all the nerve-trunks directly distributed to all four of 
the feet up to and above the wrists and ankles impairs walking so little 
as to make it highly unlikely that the loss of receptivity of the feet 
destroys any large factor in the reflex basis of these acts. 


For the denervation of the feet the following nerves have been severed, in hind-limb the 
anterior and posterior tibials, musculo-cutaneous and external saphenous about 5 cm. 
above ankle and internal saphenous above knee. In the fore-limb the severed nerves have 
been musculo-cutaneous, radial, median and dorsal and palmar divisions of ulnar about 
4 om. above wrist. It makes no obvious difference to the result whether these sections 
are made all at one time or seriatim. The section of anterior and posterior tibial, and of 
median and ulnar paralyses of course the intrinsic muscles of the feet. Yet in some cases 
hardly any noticeable disturbance follows. More often however the following defect 
appears in one or more of the feet. The animal is apt to stand with the toes of one or 
more of the feet doubled up underneath the planta. And although it may not do this in 
standing, on taking a few steps the toes of one or other foot are apt to double under in 
that manner, The way in which this occurs is that in the advance movement of the step 
the toes instead of just clearing the ground brush against it and are passively turned under 
the foot and when the foot is set down at the anterior turning point of the step the toes 
lies under it, and no correction of the malposition is made, the animal seeming unaware 
of it. 

It might be thought that this defect was due to motor paralysis of the short extensor 
of the toes which of necessity follows severance of anterior tibial nerve. But section of 
that nerve alone does not produce the underturning. Moreover a similar defect appears 
in fore-foot where there is no short extensor of the toes. In some cases this disturbance 
is transient. Slight increase of the lift of the foot in the advance phase of the step would 
obviate it. Hence it occurs less when the walk is quick than when it is slow. The de- 
sensitised foot later in some cases shows an abnormally high lift in stepping. 


Apart from this defect in the management of the toes the natural 
standing and walking of the animal appears little affected by this 
denervation of the feet. In regarding the feet as denervated by the 
above nerve-sections it must be remembered that long tendons which 
enter the foot proceed from a number of leg muscles situate far above 
the ankle, and the fleshy parts and musculo-tendinous regions of these 
muscles contain many deep receptors, whose afferent nerves enter high up 
and never apprvuach the foot directly and are therefore not severed in the 
above experiments. But the fact remains that in so far as contribution 
to the reflex taxis of the step is made by receptors from the foot the con- 
tribution concerns merely the posture and movements of the digits of the 
foot. With the actual reflex execution of the step by the rest of the 
limb these receptors seem to have little or nothing todo, Reflex stepping 


a 
* 
* 
4 
‘al 
7 
4 
» 
‘ 


78 C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


excited by any of the stimuli mentioned above as competent in the 
deoapitate or spinal preparations is evoked as easily and perfectly from 
the limbs with denervated feet as from the limbs with foot-nerves intact. 
Moreover in those preparations the reflex stepping starts and continues 
well when the preparation is laid on its side the feet not touching the 
floor or when, as mentioned above, the preparation is supported 1 
above the ground so that the feet hang merely in the air. 

Nor is the reflex stepping annulled or even obviously impaired by 
section of all the various cutaneous nerves of the limb. When in 
addition to the foot-nerves the external cutaneous, ilioinguinal, internal 
saphenous, small gluteal, and postero-external cutaneous in both hind- 
limbs are severed no obvious impairment results in the reflex stepping. 


A prominent skin-fold (dog) extends along the outer edge of the groin. Stroking the 
anterior part of this fold or the skin in front of it often evokes reflex stepping of the spinal 
hind-limbs, and this is accentuated if the skin right and left be stroked alternately. This 
stepping opens with flexion of ipsilateral knee and hip and ankle. It seemed that 
stretching of this skin might occur when the limb extends fully as at end of the extension 
phase of the step. Yet stretching of the skin with the fingers fails to give the limb reflex. 
Also cocainisation of this skin region makes no obvious difference to the reflex stepping. 


There is one reflex from the planta which appears in several ways 
suited to play a part in the reflex step. Broad innocuous pressure on 
the planta spreading the digital pads and cushion excites a vigorous 
brief extension of the whole limb. This is the“ extensor thrust'.” It is 
practically annulled by severance of the two plantar nerves. The move- 
ment amounts to a vigorous thrust of the foot downward and backward. 
Were the foot on the ground this extensor thrust would propel the body 
forward and upward. The mode of its elicitation suggests that the 
weight of the animal applied through the foot against the ground 
probably excites it in the natural course of the step. When first 
describing’ the reflex I regarded it as likely to supply the looked for 
stimulus of direct extension of the stepping limb. Philippson“ has 
allotted this réle to the reflex in his description of the reflex mechanism 
of the trot. 

Further acquaintance with this reflex leads me to doubt whether it 
plays an important part in the stepping of the walk and trot, Section of 
the nerves of the foot annuls this reflex, but does not seriously impair 
reflex stepping. The ipsilateral extension which the reflex gre is 


Integrative Action of the Nervous System, p. 67. 
This Journal, xxrx, p. 58. 1908. 
> Op. cit. p. 82. | 


: 
7 
re 
| 
2 
* 
> 
J 
2 
z 
3 
A 
2 
2 
1 
4 
4 
= * 
. 


. LIMB REFLEX ES. 79 


usually synchronously accompanied by crossed extension, the form of 
extension of the crossed limb being a brisk vigorous thrust backward 
like that of the ipsilateral limb itself. The stimulus evokes, in fact, a 
bilateral thrust backward symmetrically executed by both hind-limbs. 
Such a movement is incompatible with walk or trot. It is however 
perfectly accordant with the movement of the gallop. This latter 
significance for the reflex is strengthened by a further observation. 
In a dog, in which spinal transection had been carried out between 6th 
and 7th cervical nerves and the animal kept under examination 132 
days subsequently, the “extensor thrust” was easily obtained from 
either hind-foot, The elicitation of the thrust in either hind-foot 
was accompanied by a synchronous sharp extension not only of the 
fellow hind-limb, but of both fore-limbs as well. Elbows and wrists 
were extended and thrown forward at the same time that hind-limbs 
were extended and thrust back. The movement obviously resembled a 
phase of the gallop. The observation supports Philippson’s' view of 
the reflex as contributory to the gallop. If however it plays any part 
in the walk or trot it can only do so in some weakened form in which 
it is unaccompanied by its collateral effects on crossed hind-limb and 
ipsilateral fore-limb. Moreover, reflex stepping, even in the shape of the 
gallop, goes forward in spinal dog, as Philippson“ has shown, when 
the animal is supported in the air and therefore in absence of all 
1 stimuli to the feet. The extensor thrust cannot therefore be 

an indispensable factor in the reflex step. The possibility however 
remains that, under conditions appropriate to it, it is a contributory 
factor, though not an indispensable one. 

Extension of the limb can also be obtained as a reflex result of 
stimulation of certain superficial afferents of the inguinal, ischial and 
perineal regions, Grounds were adduced above (Sect. 1, p. 54) for 
regarding these reflexes as not concerned with progression, but as more 
probably sexual, etc. The extension they evoke in their own limb is 
accompanied by synchronous extension of the crossed fellow limb, a 
movement incompatible with walk or trot. 

The intrinsic stimuli for reflex stepping of the limb do not therefore 
appear referable to any part of the skin of the limb. Movement of the 
limb as an excitant of stepping in it appears to act in virtue of deep 
receptors of the limb. Supporting this latter possibility are the following 
data. (i) Artificial stimuli, both mechanical and electrical, applied to 
the afferent nerves of the limb muscles uniformly evoke (v. supra, 

Op. cit. p. 86. 2 Op. cit. p. 29. 


— 
— —E—mÿ — — — — 
ad — 
‘ 
f 
— 
— 
* 
4 
0 
q 
‘ 
* 


80 C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


Sect. 1, 1, pp. 35 and 55) reflex flexion of their own limb and reflex 
extension of the fellow limb. (ii) Passive stretch of the knee extensor 
excites reflex relaxation of that muscle’ and reflex contraction of the 
crossed fellow muscle’; and this reflex is excited through the afferent 
nerve of the extensor muscle itself. (iii) Passive, and also active, 
shortening of the knee extensor excites contraction of that muscle and 
sometimes, though not regularly, reflex relaxation of the crossed fellow 
muscle‘; and here again the afferent nerve is that of the knee extensor 
itself. (iv) A gentle brief passive extension of the limb in the 
decapitate preparation is often immediately followed by active flexion 
of the limb. Of the muscles engaged in spinal stepping, one of the 
most active is the sartorius. With this muscle the following obser- 
vation can usually be obtained in the decapitate preparation (cat). 
The peroneal, popliteal, small sciatic and obturator nerves are severed, 
also internal saphenous at groin and the nerve of quadriceps extensor. 
Sartorius in that limb is rapidly resected from its insertions and 
separated from all lateral and deep connections, so that it lies free and 
retracted on the front of the thigh, retaining however its nerve and 
blood supply. The knee is then lightly held with one hand and some- 
what quickly extended by means of the foot held in the other hand. 
As this is done the sartorius is seen to contract, especially when the 
extension of knee reaches completion. This reflex contraction of 
sartorius occurs chiefly in the medial band (v. supra, p. 45) of the 
muscle. That band is pre-eminently a flexor of knee. This reflex can 
be obtained many times in fairly rapid succession. Conversely on 
passively flexing the knee a reflex contraction usually occurs also in 
sartorius, but pre-eminently in the lateral band of the muscle. This 
band is especially in its distal part an extensor of knee. Adduction and 
abduction of thigh under these circumstances and also when obturator 
nerve has been left unsevered does not in my experience cause contrac- 
tion in sartorius. Extension of hip does do so occasionally and then the 
contraction is chiefly of the proximal part of lateral band; that part is 
a flexor of hip. | 

Similar observations can be obtained from semitendinosus, biceps 
femoris posterior, tenuissimus and gracilis. Passive extension of 
knee and ankle or of either of these joints alone excites contraction in 


1 Sherrington. O. J. of Expt. Physiol. u. 1909. 
* Philippson. Op. eit. p. 81. 
* Sherrington. Q. J. of Expt. Physiol., loc. cit. 
* Sherrington. Ibid. 


* * 
* 
* a 
2 
14 . 
2 2 
“ 
3 
é 
> 
‘ 
f 
* 
* 
« — 
. 
. 
* 
—* 
— ‘ 


LIMB REFLEXES. 81 


those muscles when they have been completely detached from their 
insertions at knee. The passive extension still excites the reflex when 
internal and external saphenous nerves, and musculocutaneous of 
peroneal and posterior tibial close above ankle have been severed and 
the foot thus far deafferented is used for manipulating the limb in the 
movement. The reflex contraction is a brief one, the stimulus seeming 
to consist therefore in the movement of extension and not in the extended 
posture when once assumed. 

(v) An important stimulus in the reflex step lies at the attached 
base of the limb and is produced by extension of hip (v. supra, p. 76) 
Exteroceptive stimuli having been excluded (v. supra, p. 78) it seems 
natural to relate that stimulus to changes in form and tension of 
muscles and fasci#. The muscular sense-perceptions of the limb are 
finer for its proximal joints than for its distal (Goldscheider)*. 
Magnus“ has shown that in regard to the influence of initial 
posture upon the direction of the reflex movement of the limb, the 
influence of hip is greater than knee and of knee than ankle. The 
flexion-reflex, as an exteroceptive reaction, is most potently excited 
from the free apex of the limb (v. supra, Sect. 1, p. 32). The 
stepping reflex, as regards deep stimuli situate in the limb itself, seems 
most excitable by stimuli at its attached base. This is as would be 
expected if the latter reflex is as regards its afferent source in the 
limb itself a proprioceptive reaction. 


8. Flewion-phase of the spinal step. 

The flexion movement evinced in the reflex step differs in several 
' particulars from that seen in the scratch-reflex. But with the flexion 
movement of the nociceptive flexion-reflex it agrees singularly closely. 
The main difference is that in the flexion phase of the step the flexion 
is not maintained and flexion at knee and ankle ceases somewhat earlier 
than does the flexion at hip, whereas in the nociceptive reflex flexion at 
all three joints is maintained. But when the reflex step is not vigorous 
in the spinal preparation the flexion at all three joints tends to cease at 
the same time. The stepping reflex then has the character to which its 
earliest observer, Freusberg?*, probably alluded when he termed it the 
“mark-time” reflex, for it then fails to properly advance the limb over 
1 Arch. f. Physiol, Leipzig, 1889. 


2 Pfliiger's Archiv, oxxx. p. 219. 1909. 
Ibid., x, 1874. 


PH. XL. | 6 


— 
‘ 
— 
« 
al 
t 
* 
* * 
* 
ay 
5 
1 
: 
~ 
* 
4 
b 
‘ 
. 
7. * 
* 
4 
\ 


82 C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


the ground. The other differences between the flexion of nociceptive 
flexion-reflex and that of the reflex step are that in the former the 
flexion is greater, and is succeeded by extension only after the stimulus 
is withdrawn, whereas in the step-reflex it is succeeded by extension 
during the continuance of the stimulus. 

Under analysis of the musculature at work in the two reflexes the 
similarity between the flexion of the flexion- reflex and that of the flexion 
phase of the step is again significantly close. By appropriate isolation 
of the muscles of the limb and by then exciting the stepping-reflex it is 
possible from a series of experiments to draw up a list of the muscles 
which contract and relax in the flexion phase of the spinal step. The 
list can hardly hope to be complete, since the procedure for isolating the 
individual muscles is necessarily severe and heightens the reflex thres- 
hold. The interference with the reflex which the requisite severance of 
a number of muscular nerves in the limb causes is greater than in the 
case of the nociceptive flexion-reflex. This is of itself suggestive of the 
proprioceptive nature of the former reflex. Often when the necessary 
isolation of a particular muscle has been completed the reflex, although 
previously regular and vigorous, is obtainable no longer. 

In the series of experiments performed the muscles actually observed 
to contract in the flexion phase of the reflex step have been as follows: 


Psoas magnus Semitendinosus 

Sartorius median band Tibialis anticus 

Sartorius lateral band, upper part Extensor longus digitorum 
Tensor fascism femoris brevis 

Gracilis Gluteus minimus 

Biceps femoris, posterior part Tenuissimus. 
Extensor brevis digitorum. 


These are all of them muscles which contract in the flexion of the 
nociceptive flexion-reflex. In the latter certain other muscles (psoas 
parvus, pectineus, tensor fascie femoris longus) were ascertained to 
contract also. In the flexion phase of the spinal step I have not been 
able to assure myself that they do, but it would be hazardous to say 
that they do not when the step is well developed. 

In addition to the above which contract the experiments show that 
certain other muscles relax in the flexion phase of the reflex step. 


These are: 
Vastus lateralis  Gastrocnemius 


Crureus Biceps femoris anterior. 


75 
2 
— 


° 
K 
‘ J 
4 
* 
* 
* 
* 
> 
Lae 
Vastus medialis Soleus | 
d 


LIMB REFLEXES. 83 


These also are all of them muscles which relax in the flexion of the 
nociceptive flexion-reflex. In the latter there were also ascertained to 
relax part of adductor major, and distal part of lateral band of sartorius. 
These may relax also in the flexion phase of the reflex step but I have 
not been able to assure myself that they do. 


4. Extension phase of the spinal step. 
Just as flexion phase of the reflex step resembles the flexion-reflex 
in its play on the musculature of the limb, so the step’s extension phase 
resembles similarly the crossed extension reflex of the limb. Observa- 


tions by the same method show that in the extension phase of the ite 
muscles which contract are: 


Vastus lateralis Biceps femoris, anterior part 
Crureus Gastrocnemius 

Sartorius (part of lateral band) 

Vastus medialis Soleus 

Adductor minor Flexor longus digitorum. 

The muscles observed to relax are: 

Psoas magnus Biceps femoris, posterior part 

Sartorius, medial band Gluteus minimus 

Rectus femoris Tidialis anticus 
| Gracilis Extensor longus digitorum 
Semitendinosus. 


The muscles which contract are muscles which contract in the 
crossed extension reflex and those which relax are muscles which relax 
in that reflex. Flexor longus digitorum in the crossed extension reflex 
certainly contracts late; its contraction appears to come late also in 
extension phase of step. 


5. The “simultaneous coordination” exhibited. 


78 Analysis of the behaviour of the individual muscles confirms 
therefore the similarity between flexion phase of step and the flexion- 
reflex of the limb and between extension phase of step and the crossed 
extension reflex of the limb. The principles (Sect. 1, p. 45, and II. p. 56) 
of neural taxis and coordinative handling of the muscles exemplified in 
the nociceptive flexion-reflex and the crossed extension reflex therefore 
apply also to the reflex step. 
6—2 


* 
* 
Quadratus femoris 
4 
| * 7 2 3 * * > * * 


C. S. SHERRINGTON, 


— 
84 
: ＋ — 

— 
27 ‘ 
| 
* 

7 — — * 
\ 
P 
i \\ 
4 
\\ 
— 

84 4 

7 2 


LIMB REFLEXES. 35 


Fig. 10. Muscles observed by direct analysis to contract in the spinal step (oat, dog) 
I, in the extension phase, II, in the flexion phase. 


1. Orureus and vastus medialis A. Tibialis anticus and extens. long. digit. 
2. Vastus lateralis B. Biceps femoris posterior 
8. Adductor minor E. Extensor brevis digitorum 
4. Adductor major in part F. Tensor fascim femoris brevis 
5. Semimembranosus G. Gracilis 
6. Biceps femoris anterior I. Psoas magnus 
7. Gastrocnemius | M. Gluteus minimus 
8. Soleu. P. Peroneus longus 
9. Flexor longus digitorum (really passes R. Reotus femoris 
internal to ankle) 8. Sartorius lateral band, S’ medial band 
0. Quadratus femoris T. Semitendinosus. 


Just as the nociceptive flexion-reflex does not exhibit fully the same 
form when excited from widely different small afferent nerves of the 
limb (Sect. 1) so in the decapitate preparation the step-reflex varies 
somewhat in character as excited from this or that afferent source. 
When elicited in the decapitate preparation from perineal region or 
tail the stepping movement includes less flexion at hip than when 
elicited from a fore-limb or from the neck. In the dog the stepping 
when it first emerges after spinal transection in the thoracic region is 
often almost exclusively a rhythmic flexion at hips. The most usual 
imperfection in the step executed as a purely spinal reflex is in regard 
to the extension and flexion of the digits. The digits may even slightly 
passively flex when the ankle dorso-flexes, indicating that extensor 
brevis digitorum is not acting and that extensor longus digitorum is 
not acting strongly. Movement of the digits is often practically absent 
when the spinal stepping is feeble, though strikingly present in the 
vigorous reflex stepping of the spinal preparation after full recovery 
from shock i. These variations in form and completeness of the spinal 
step suggest that as regards any source which it has in the afferents of 
the limb itself that source is multiple, and though predominantly 
connected with the hip has also contributory channels from other 
regions of the limb. The remote source is often single, but the intrinsic 
source is probably commonly multiple. 


6. “Successive coordination” in spinal stepping. 

i. Salient features in the problem of the successive coordination of 
the reflex step are the anterior and posterior turning points of the 
movement. The reflex consists of an alternation of two antagonistic 
reflex movements, of flexion and extension respectively. It might have 

1 H. Munk. Sitzungsber. d. Berlin Akad. d. Wissensch, 1909. 


* 
7 
2 
— 
4 
. 
3 
‘ 
* 
| 
| 
* 
18 


86 C. 8. SHERRINGTON. 


been thought that for this two rhythmically repeated external stimali 
were necessary. But experiment shows that it can be excited in its 
entirety by various single stimuli and these not rhythmic but continuous 
in character, I include here among continuous stimuli faradic since 
although intermittent their rhythm (30—100 p. sec.) obviously bears no 
relation to the rhythm (about 2 p. sec.) of the reflex. In the decapitated 
preparation it is excited and maintained in a hind-limb by continuous 
pressure of a clip affixed to a remote point of skin (v. supra, p. 74); 
by faradisation of one or other of certain points in the cross section of 
the bulb or of the cord in the Ist and 2nd cervical segments; or by 
faradisation of an appropriate afferent nerve. 


For direct stimulation of the cut surface of the bulb or cord this faradisation has been 
carried out as follows. A diffuse electrode consisting of a large copper plate covered with 
cotton wool soaked in warm strong NaCl solution is applied to the shaved surface of the 
upper arm. A single-wire electrode of the pattern described in a previous paper’ is applied 
to the fresh cross-section of bulb at calamus seriptorius after removal of the head. Weak 
faradisation, e. 9. 40 units of the Kronecker scale when applied in the region 
of funiculus gracilis evokes reflex stepping in the ipsilateral hind-limb; this stepping 
commences with flexion of the limb including hip-fiexion. If the stimulus be enk the 
stepping may be confined to the ipsilateral hind-limb; if stronger, stepping of the 
contralateral hind-limb commencing with extension, occurs also. Occasionally a similar 
result has been obtained from an area ventral to the caput cornu posterioris. These 
localisations in the cross-section are mentioned but the uncertainty in restricting the 
effect of the currents to minute spots makes them mere approximations. 


Elicitation of the reflex by these continuous stimuli must mean that 
the stimulus having produced its opening effect, ¢.g. flexion becomes 
after a 4 sec. or so inoperative for that reflex, and on the other hand 
apparently operative for the opposite reflex, viz. extension for which it 
was not at first effective; and then } sec. later becomes again operative 
for flexion and not for extension, and so on. In other words there 
occurs rhythmically a refractory phase for flexion accompanied by 
removal of a refractory phase for extension, and then a refractory phase 
for extension accompanied by removal of a refractory phase for flexion. 
In the stepping reflex we have as in the scratch reflex a reaction with 
a rhythmically recurrent refractory phase which seems to alternately 
block one and then the other of two opposed simpler reflexes. The 
seat of the rhythm is obviously not peripheral. It is not in the muscles 
or their motor nerves for they do not when thrown into activity in 
other ways show any trace of rhythm of this frequency. Nor can it 
lie in the receptive organs of the skin or their afferent nerve trunks for 


A. Frohlich and Sherrington. This Journal, xxvuz. 14. 1901. 


a 
* 
| 
J | 
* 
‘ 
4 
* 


LIMB REFLEXES. 87 


direct stimulation of the cross section of the spinal axis itself provokes 
the rhythmic reply. The rhythm is therefore central in its seat. 

Remembering that proprioceptive stimuli aroused in the limb itself 
can excite the reflex the possibility naturally suggests itself that the 
reflex movement of the limb initiated by a distant stimulus will arouse 
in the limb stimuli capable of modifying the influence there of the 
original stimulus. To take for instance the step-reflex of the hind-limb 
as evoked by stimulation of the ipsilateral fore-foot. The opening phase of 
the step-reflex is then usually extension. But as shown (v. supra, p. 75) 
extension of the limb produced by letting the limb drop under its own 
weight provokes when the extension has reached its full an ensuent 
active flexion of the limb, accompanied by extension of the opposite 
hind-limb. Extension of the limb appears therefore to evoke in the 
limb a stimulus exciting flexion of its own limb, accompanied as usual 
by crossed extension of fellow limb. Applying this to the step-reflex 
produced by fore-limb stimulation, the stimulation of fore-limb by 
extending hind-limb tends to evoke secondarily in hind-limb a stimulus 
for flexion of this latter. Now, stimuli exciting the flexors of the limb 
concurrently inhibit the extensors. There would therefore ensue from 
the primary, the distant, stimulus A, a secondary stimulus in the limb 
itself, a proprioceptive stimulus, B tending to cut short the influence of 
A and replace A’s reflex by the opposite reflex, namely flexion. But 
the mere execution of the flexion removes the stimulus B which caused 
it, and allows the influence of the continuous primary stimulus A to 
exert itself again. Thus the proprioceptive stimuli aroused secondarily 
in the limb tend to give the continuous influence of A a rhythmic iu- 
termittent effect’. 

The experimental results point therefore to a mechanism comparable 
with that of the Selbsteuerwng of the inspiratory movement first noted by 
Hering and Breuer“. There contraction of the diaphragm in inspira- 
tion is in due course cut short by a reflex inhibition traceable to a 
stimulus generated by the mechanical action of the diaphragm itself. 
In this respiratory mechanism the stimulus so generated arises mainly 
in the lungs and the vagus is therefore the main afferent nerve. 
Baglioni* has moreover shown a contributory source in the diaphragm 


1 Of. H. Winterstein, Pfiiger’s Archiv, cxxvu, 527. 1909. 

Sitzungsd. d. k. k. Akad. d. Wissensch. Wien. 909. 1868. 

2 Centralbl. f. Physiol. 28. 1908 ; also Mislawski, Centralbl. f. Physiol. 1901. Of. 
also for the chest wall as a whole, R. du Bois Reymond and Katzenstein, Arck. f. 


Physiol. p. 518. 1901. | 


4 5 
2 
> 
* 
“4 
7 
5 
£ 
4 
4 9 
H 
| 
| 4 
€ 
* 
* 
7 
* 


88 0. S SHERRINGTON. 


itself, the centripetal impulses ascending afferent fibres in the phrenic. 
In these reactions there is evident analogy between the rhythmic reflex 
inspiration and the rhythmic reflex of the step; for in each the movement 
is arrested and reversed by a secondary reflex generated mechanically 
by the primary movement itself and antagonistic to the primary 
reaction in its influence on the muscles. Similarly with the vasomotor 
centre and the heart, activity of the general vaso-constrictor centre by 
raising the arterial blood-pressure stretches the aortic wall and by so 
doing mechanically excites n. depressor, the afferent nerve of the aorta’, 
and thus reflexly moderates the activity of the vasomotor centre itself, 
the originator of the whole reaction. In these cases the. primary 
reaction generates a secondary antagonistic to the primary itself. 

Thus there recurs rhythmically during reflex stepping a conflict 
between two stimuli exerting opposed influence on the motoneurones of 
the limb musculature. The case of the concurrence of two stimuli 
having opposed influence on one and the same group of motoneurones 
has been examined“, and for the case of two muscles which the reflex step 
actually engages. The result of the conflict between the opposed 
influence is found to fall into one or other of three types determined by 
the relative intensities of the two opposed stimuli. We may take the 
case of S, the remote and primary stimulus, being excitant for moto- 
neurons & and inhibitory for motoneurons F. If while S is in operation 
a stimulus T arises whose influence is inhibitory for motoneurons E and 
excitant for motoneurons F, the three types of result actually observed 
are as follows. (a) If E be much weaker than 8 its inhibitory influence 
is unable to outwardly modify S’s excitatory influence as expressed by 
the contracting muscle; similarly, S’s inhibitory influence wholly 
prevents L's excitatory effect from showing on the opponent muscle. 
(8) If L is much more intense than S the former's excitatory effect, to 
judge by the muscle, overcomes &'s inhibitory effect wholly, and T's 
inhibitory effect wholly suppresses S’s excitatory effect. (Y) If S and 2 
are of not widely unequal intensity the excitatory influence of S is 


partially suppressed by the inhibitory influence exerted by = and the 


inhibitory influence of S only partially suppresses the excitatory of >. 
In effect there results contraction of the muscles E which S excites and 
of their antagonists the muscles F which L excites; but the grade of 
contraction of I is less than when & is acting without E, and the grade 


A. Tscherm ak and Koster, Pfliiger’s Archiv, xomt. 1902. 
* Sherrington, Roy. Soc. Proc. B. 80. Nov. 1908, Vol. 81, 249. March, 1909. 


7 
* 
2 
a 
4 
7 
* 
‘ 
* 
{ 
4 
+ 
3 
— 


LIMB REFLEXES. 89 


of contraction of F is less than when L is acting without 8. In short 
double reciprocal innervation is at work and the influences of stimuli S 
and T add themselves algebraically in their effect on the muscles E and 
F, and therefore on the motoneurones E and F. 

In the limb-reflex therefore when the stimulus S by the eie 
effect of its reflex on the limb generates there a loca] proprioceptive 
stimulus = antagonistic to S itself, the particular result which will 
acerue will depend on the relative intensities of S and Z. When 8 
is very intense in comparison with T, as is the case when a nocuous 
cutatieous stimulus is applied to the limb itself, L is unable to modify 
the effect of S and there results the usual nociceptive unalternating reflex, 
the protective reflex folding up the limb out of harm’s way. When the 
local centre is brisk and the skin stimulus not too powerful even with this 
nociceptive reflex = sometimes breaks through & in a brief partial and 
irregular manner. 

When 8 is remote and for that reason relatively less intense even 
though cutaneous and nocuous the intensity of the secondary generated 
L is not so unequally matched with it; = then interferes with the effect 
of S regularly, and the rhythmic alternating reflex “stepping” ensues. 
And frequently in spinal stepping the to and fro movements of the limb 
oscillate not about a neutral position of the pendent limb but about 
a position in which the limb is somewhat extended or somewhat flexed. 
For instance, stimulus S when in the median line of the perineum 
causes bipedal stepping of remarkably symmetrical character right and 
left, operating especially the knees and ankles. But if the point of 
application of the stimulus be shifted to one side of the midline the 
stepping is characterised by the greater flexion of the limb of that side 
especially of hip, while the stepping of contralateral limb exhibits in- 
creased extension of hip. That is, throughout the stepping the ipsilateral 
limb retains a somewhat flexed posture while the contralateral limb 
retains a somewhat extended one. Here clearly the relaxation of the 
flexors in the one limb and of the extensors in the other is incomplete. 
Now the cutaneous stimulus S is responsible for the flexion of the 
ipsilateral limb and for the extension of the contralateral. In the 
ipsilateral limb throughout and even at acme of extension phase there 
remains some contraction of flexors ; and in contralateral limb through- 
out and even at acme of flexion phase there remains some contraction 
of extensors. The persistence during a protagonist's contraction of some 
contraction in its antagonist is as regards spinal reflexes characteristic of 
the simultaneous operation of two antagonistic stimuli of nearly balanced 


~ 
< 
4 
K 
4 
4 
1 
—4 
> 
. 
q 
— 
» 
— 


90 C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


action on the muscle couple. The case is 3, ie. (y) of the three cases 
experimentally tested above. The solution indicated therefore for these 
forms of the spinal stepping is two antagonistic stimuli and double 
reciprocal innervation. . And similarly with the scratch-reflex where 
the to-and-fro movement of thigh oscillates about a position in which 
the thigh is even at completion of the extension phase still somewhat 
_ flexed. Similarly with the respiratory movements, when they are 

ick and deep the contraction of the diaphragm does not wholly cease 

uring expiration’; the diaphragm relaxes but its relaxation is incom- 
plete. In the above instance the incompleteness of the relaxation of 
the flexors in ipsilateral limb indicates that = in that limb is relatively 
weak as against S; and the same relative weakness of L is indicated by 
the incompleteness of the flexion of the contralateral limb for there S is 
an extensor stimulus. 

Hence it is evident that the particular form assumed by the reflex 
stepping of a limb is influenced by the nature (locus, etc.) and intensity 
of the remote initiatory (cutaneous or other) stimulus & in relation to 
the secondary proprioceptive one T. The exact degree of rhythmic 
relaxation being graded by the grading of the intensities of the two 
opponent stimuli & and T, the reflex step can assume in consequence 
various forms appropriate to this or that circumstance. Just as the 
plasticity of the tonus allows various modifications to the standing 
posture. 

Whether the intensity of the secondary proprioceptive stimulus > is 
ever high enough in comparison with that of the initiatory remote 
(cutaneous) stimulus S to give the second type of result (8) remains 
without direct answer from my observations. My impression is that in 
the vigorous more perfect reflex stepping of the spinal hind-limbs of the 
dog after the period of shock has passed, such a combination usually 
occurs, The amplitude of the excursions of the step is then great. It 
may well be that flexors and extensors then alternately fully relax, just 
as in natural breathing“ the diaphragm not unfrequently during the 
expiratory phase shows for a short time complete absence of all con- 
traction. The reflex stepping of the spinal hind-limbs of the dog after 
the period of shock has passed, proceeds with remarkable freedom from 


This Journal, xxxrv. 1. 1906; T. Graham Brown, Quart. Jnl. of Expt. Physiol, u. 
248. 1909. Ibid. . 21. 1910. 

2 R. Dittler, Pfiiger’s Archiv. 130, p. 400-443. 1909. For an interesting comparison 
between the nervous regulation of the respiratory movement and of a limb-joint, see 
F. H. Scott, this Journal, xxxvi. 301. 1908. ; 

Dittler, ibid. 


fore e' 
20 
1 
* 
* 
. 
4 
4 
1 
fi 
‘ 
‘ 
‘ 
i 4 
= 


LIMB REFLEX 91 


fatigue. It will continue for a quarter of an hour or more without 
obvious abatement. This is intelligible in light of the fact that the 
muscles whose contraction, i.e. the motoneurons whose discharge, pro- 
duces the movement of the one phase of the step are none of them those 
whose contraction, i.e. discharge, produces the movement of the other 
phase. It is obvious that fatigue is least likely to affect such a reflex 
when primary stimulus S and secondary proprioceptive stimulus = are 
so balanced that = on each recurrence suffices to reduce to complete 
quiescence & s motoneurons and muscles, and & in its turn to completely 
quell any after - discharge due to T. The advantages of such a balance 
seem to explain the common experience and every day teaching that 
there is a proper way of walking, etc., as distinguished from bad habits 
of walk, etc. Walking for instance with a crouched posture of the limb 
must entail that the extensor stimulus never renders the flexor neurons 
fully quiescent, so that the action of the walk entails an ingravescent 
fatigue. And this would be avoided were the limb freely extended at 
each extension phase. A full and free extension phase connotes a full 
and free relaxation of flexors and a phase of complete quiescence for 
their neurones: and vice versa. 

The reaction caused by the secondary stimulus L, the proprioceptive 
stimulus, tends itself in its turn to generate a proprioceptive stimulus 
of opposed influence to the secondary stimulus T, and harmonious with 
the original primary stimulus 8. Evidence of this is given by the fact 
that the stepping reflex once started often outlives for many seconds the 
duration of the primary stimulus which originally evokes it, it continues 
for a time after the primary stimulus is altogether withdrawn. Where, 
as in the spinal preparation, there is nothing to restrain it. It proceeds 
for a time by its own intrinsic stimulation of the limb. The same holds 
true for the scratch-reflex, and constitutes one of a number of resem- 
blances between these two rhythmic alternating reflexes of the limb. 
And in both this after continuance of the reflex can be cut short by 
mere mechanical passive arrest of the moving limb. 

Certain difficulties however attach to the explanation of the rhythmic 
reflex of stepping by interference between remote and secondary intrinsic 
stimuli. These are (1) that passive movement especially flexion does 
not so regularly and potently excite opposite active movement, especially 
extension, as might on the above view be expected: (2) that sartorius 
when isolated and detached except for nerve and blood supply will still 
sometimes “step” on faradisation of cervical cord: (3) that a hind-limb 
when deafferented (8rd to 9th post-thoracic afferent roots inclusive 
severed) still gives traces of the reflex step on faradisation of ipsilateral 


* 
< 
= 
- 
‘ 
x 
4 
¥ 
* 7 f ~ — * E 4 * 


92 | C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


side of spinal cord at Ist cervical level; and that the scratch- reflex 
which in many ways resembles the stepping- reflex is under similar 
circumstances still elicitable. These difficulties suggest that generation 
of a secondary local stimulus and its interference with the operation of 
the primary remote stimulus, although regulative of the thythm 
(cf. vagus and respiratory rhythm) is of itself not the sole rhythm-pro- 
ducing factor in the reflex. Other factors (vide EH subsections — 


contralateral fellow limb. 

ii, “Umkehr” (v. Vexkiill, Magnus). In the ray-arm of the Brittle- 
star, Ophioglypha, v. Uexküll! has found that a given stimulus tends to 
excite contraction in whichever of the two opposed muscles is at the 
time the more stretched. Magnus shows that the same phenomenon 
is exhibited by the tail (cat)* when rendered spinal. Also* that it is 
clearly seen in the spinal reflexes of the hind-limbs of the dog. He has 
demonstrated this influence in two limb reflexes especially interesting 
in connection with the step, namely in crossed extension reflex and the 
crossed reflex-flexion of hip elicited by passive extension of the other 
hip. From these observations we learn that in mobile parts furnished 
with antagonistic muscles passive extension tends to make the reflex 
effect of a given stimulus flexion of that part whereas passive flexion 
tends to make the reflex effect extension. This reversal (Umkehr) 
would in such a reflex as the step explain the anterior turning point by 
the mechanical flexion of the limb when it had reached a certain grade 
diverting the excitatory effect from flexor motoneurons to extensor 
motoneurons; and the posterior turning point conversely. Such an 
explanation would be a welcome solution of the problem; and the obser- 
vations already obtained by Magnus show that this reversal is potent 
in mammalian spinal reflexes just as in the reflexes of the Echinoderm. 
Can the Umkehr of itself explain the rhythmic alternation of 
flexion-extension and extension-flexion in the reflex step? Were it 
by itself able to produce the turning points of the reflex step one 
would, I think, expect passive flexion and passive extension of the limb 
to determine still more easily than at present they seem to movements 

of opposite direction to their own. 
, Further, in the step reflex when isolated muscles are under anew 
tion I have several times seen a muscle still exhibit the rhythmic 


1 Zeitech. . Biol. XI VI. I. 1904; Ergebn. d. Physiol. ux. 2. 1. 1904; cf. also Mangold, 
Pfitiger’s Archiv, oxxvt. 871. 1909. Zeitschr. f. Physiol. xxi. 141. 1909. 
Pfliiger’s Archiv, oxxx. p. 251. — 
* Ibid. oxxx. p. 219. 1909. 


2 
‘4 
1 
| 
4 
4 
Pos 


LIMB REFLEXES. 93 


response when quite severed from its insertion and lying unstretched 
and retracted, and when rhythmic movement of the limb was practically 
excluded and what slight movement still persisted in the limb could 
not mechanically affect the tension of the isolated muscle iteelf. 
Muscles in which the rhythmic response has under these circumstances 
still persisted have been sartorius and semitendinosus. Thus, in 
sartorius good rhythmic response was seen when the muscle lay 
retracted on the front of the thigh attached only at its upper origin, 
and after complete severance of the popliteal, peroneal, hamstring 
obturator and vasto-crureus nerves, and after psoas magnus, psoas parvus, 
tensor fascim femoris, the glutei and all the muscles attached to the 
trochanters and intertrochanteric line had been resected up from their 
insertions. Yet the muscle on stimulation of the cross-section of spinal 
cord at Ist cervical segment responded with its usual rhythmic 
contraction. It lay retracted into a short lump and formed a rhythmi- 
cally jumping heap when the step reflex was elicited. It is true that 
the rhythmic “stepping” of the muscle thus isolated is always relatively 
weak : but it is difficult to see how under such circumstances Umkehr 
could produce the rhythmic response. I have seen a similar reaction 
with scratch-reflex. Professor Magnus does not indeed suggest that 
the Umkehr is responsible for the rhythmic alternation either of the 
scratch-reflex or of the step-reflex. But the importance which the 
Umkehr“ phenomenon assumes in the light of his own and v. Uexkiill’s 
fundamental papers, makes it natural in seeking an explanation of 
the “turning points” in these reflexes to consider the influence of 
“ Umkehr” as a possible factor. It seems to me a contributory factor 

but unable of itself alone to explain the alternations in these reflexes. 
The alternating movement of the reflex step of the limb may open 
either with flexion phase or extension phase, Which phase it is which 
forms the opening phase in any particular case is clearly a matter of rule. 
The opening phase is flexion in the hind-limb when the exciting stimulus 
is applied to contralateral fore-limb or to ipsilateral column of the spinal 
cord, and usually when applied to ipsilateral pinna or neck. It is 
extension when the stimulus is applied to crossed hind-limb, and 
generally ipsilateral fore-limb, and sometimes to ipsilateral pinna, 
Magnus! has shown that in the spinal hind-limbs of the dog when 
reflex stepping is elicited by dropping one thigh the primary movement 
of the crossed hip which is flexion when the initial pose of the crossed 
limb is extension often becomes extension when the initial pose of the 
1 Pfliiger’s Archiv, oxxx. p. 245. 1909, 


> 
) 4 
é 
q 
a 
4 
5 
i 
* 
4 
f 
— — 
- 
. 
* 
— 
* 


94 . S. SHERRINGTON. 


crossed limb is full flex ion (Umkehr). In the decapitate cat on exciting 
stepping in the hind- limbs by stimulating the tail, the preparation 
being symmetrically supine, I find, following Magnus’s plan with the 
crossed-reflex, that if the initial pose of one hip be full flexion the 
opening phase of the reflex step in that limb is extension, whereas if 
initial pose be extension, the opening phase of the step is flexion. 
Similarly in decerebrate rabbit. Pinching tail gives there a symmetrical 
_ hopping movement of both hind-limbs. If the initial pose of the hind- 
limbs be extension the opening phase of the reflex is bilateral flexion 
of hips, if the initial pose be flexion the opening movement is extension. 
I have not determined the latencies of the movements, but in view of 
Magnus’s observations I think these reversals of direction of the 
opening phase of the step, obtained by following the procedure described 
by him, may be instances of the Umkehr“ influence he has 
demonstrated. 

iii. Central Rebound. Passive movements of the limb by inducing 
proprioceptive stimulation certainly produce reflex effects in it and 
the fellow limbs. Active movements however are as sources of reflex 
influence probably more important, and involve moreover central nervous 
changes excitatory and inhibitory additional to those accruing to passive 
reactions. 

In each phase of the reflex step certain muscles are by appropriate 
isolation ascertained to relax (v. supra, p. 82). They are found in each 
phase to be the antagonists of the muscles which contract. The inference 
is that in this case as in the ordinary flexion-reflex and crossed extension 
reflex, there is reciprocal innervation of the prime-movers and their 
antagonists and that the relaxation of the antagonists is due to central 
inhibition. This inference can be tested as follows. A character of 
decerebrate rigidity is that it suppresses the recurrent refractory phase 
of the limb reflexes which are alternating in the decapitate preparation 
(v. supra, Sect. III, p. 70). The same stimulus which in the decapitate 
preparation excites reflex stepping with extension as its opening phase, 
excites when exactly similarly applied in the decerebrate preparation 
the same movement, namely, extension, but there then supervenes 
no reverse movement, it simply becomes a posture which is maintained 
as long as thestimulus. This gives time for examining the conditions 
of the muscular arcs in the reaction. The flexor arcs are found to be 
under inhibition. If the reaction be induced at a time when the 
flexors are already actually contracting in response to an appropriate 
reflex stimulus they immediately relax in spite of continuance of the 


— 
* 
om 
* — 
— 4 — 
— 7 
~ 
= a 


LIMB REFLEXES. 95 


excitatory stimulus’: and when the reaction is over they immediately 
show their previous contraction again. I have ascertained this both 
for sartorius and semitendinosus, two of the most active flexor muscles 
in the step; and venture to assume that it applies to the rest of the 
“flexor” group. Similarly the stimulus which in the decapitated pre- 
paration excites reflex stepping beginning with flexion phase, produces 
in the decerebrate simply maintained flexion. Examination in the above 
way shows that here again the relaxation of the extensors is due to 
central inhibition. This has been ascertained individually for vasti, 
crureus, soleus, gastrocnemius, biceps femoris anterior, quadratus 
femoris and adductor minor, and presumably applies to the whole 
group. 

It seems clear therefore that in the flexion phase of a step-reflex 
which begins with flexion, excitation of the flexor motoneurons is 
accompanied by inhibition of the extensor motoneurons; and in the 
extension phase of a step-reflex which begins with extension excitation 
of the extensor motoneurons is accompanied by inhibition of the flexor 
motoneurons. We may assume that this obtains at every repetition of 
these phases. 

Inhibitory depression of spinal motor centres is followed on removal 
of the inhibition by a state of activity greater than that obtaining in 
them before the inhibition“. This is the case alike in decapitate, spinal 
and decerebrate preparations. An instance illustrating it is the 
following. Suppose a crossed extension reflex elicited at regular interval 
by a given stimulus, The reflexes form a series of practically constant 
amplitude and duration. If in the interval between two such successive 
reflexes a strong flexion-reflex be elicited in that limb whose extensor 
muscles are replying, the extensor reflex next following is ampler and 
longer lasting than the previous one“. The flexion-reflex laid the 
extensor motoneurons under inhibition. On cessation of the flexion- 
reflex the inhibition subsides and subsequently for a short time an 
exciting stimulus (crossed-reflex) finds the extensor motoneurons in 
a condition of exalted responsiveness and excitability. Similar post- 
inhibitory exaltation was noted in the inspiratory centre by Head‘. He 
stimulated central end of one vagus with faradic currents just too weak 
to produce complete tetanic contraction of the diaphragm. During 


1 Roy. Soc. Proc. uxxxt. B. 249. 1909. 

2 Integrative Action of the Nervous System, p. 206. 

* Sherrington. Roy. Soc. Proc. uxxvi. B. 478. 1906. 
* This Journal, x. p. 1. 1889. 


— 
d 
4 
— 
, 


96 C. 8. SHERRINGTON. 


this condition an inflation of the lung at once produced relaxation of 
diaphragm by reflex inhibition. After the inflation on the lungs 
returning to their normal volume the stimulus previously ineffectual to 
produce complete tetanus of diaphragm became at once effectual. As 
in this case the inspiratory centre so in the case of the limb the exteneor 
centte after a period of inhibitory depression exhibits a period of 
increased responsiveness to excitation. ! 

This post-inhibitory exaltation manifests itself not only by increased 
responsiveness to stimuli externally applied. It gives also the “ rebound 
extensions,” namely, those seemingly spontaneous extensions which 
follow on reflex flexion when the stimulus for the latter is withdrawn. 
In decerebrate and spinal reactions the withdrawal of a flexion 
stimulus is commonly followed by an active extension. Thus a brief 
nociceptive flexion-reflex is in the decerebrate preparation generally 
diphasic, active extension following as a rebound on the flexion when 
the external stimulus is withdrawn’. These rebounds are seen with 
fore-limb as with hind-limb, and in dog and rabbit as in cat. In my 
experience they follow better on cessation of a relatively short stimulus 
than on one prolonged for several seconds“. They ensue on centrally 
applied stimuli’ as well as on peripheral. They are exhibited by 
muscles, ¢.g. vastocrureus, isolated from all but their own nerve supply 
and attachments, that is when all other nerves except that of the 
muscle in question have been severed in both hind-limbs of the decere- 
brate preparation‘. 

In the decerebrate preparation these rebounds are although 
seemingly spontaneous probably not truly so. In the decerebrate 
preparation there is a tonic reflex excitation of the extensor centres and 
this is temporarily blocked by inhibition during the flexion stimulus. 
When that stimulus is withdrawn the tonic reflex excitation finds the 
extensor centres in post-inhibitory exaltation and produces a reflex 
extension greater than that it was producing prior to interruption by 
the flexion stimulus, But in the decapitate preparation it is more 
difficult to find a reflex explanation of the rebounds. They are in that 
preparation less common and less vigorous, but they occur. In that 
preparation there is no reflex excitation playing tonically upon the 
extensor centres. The extensor rebounds are perhaps then really 
spontaneous discharges of the extensor centres due to their state of 


* Sherrington. This Journal, xxxvi. 185. 1907; Roy. Soc. Proc. B. uxxx. 58. 
Proc. Roy. Soc. B. uxxx. 61, 1908, bid. B. uxxrx. 848. 1907. 
Proc. Roy. Soc. B. uxxx. 53. , 


* ‘ 
he 
7 
| 
“3 
A 
¢ 
4 


LIMB REFLEXES. 97 


post- inhibitory exaltation; an autochthonous autonomic (E. Hering., 
A. v. Tschermak*) back swing following on allonomic inhibitory 
disturbance. 

When the musculature of the limb is examined by the methods 
given above to determine which particular muscles exhibit the rebound 
on withdrawal of a flexion stimulus, these are found in the hind-limb to 
be the following : 


Semimembranosus Adductor minor 

Biceps femoris anterior Gastrocnemius 

Vastus lateralis Quadratus femoris 

Crureus Soleus 

Vastus medialis Sartorius (distal end of lateral division). 


No muscles or part of muscles engaged in the flexion phase of the 
step show this rebound contraction ensuent on withdrawal of a flexion 
stimulus. In fore-limb muscles observed to exhibit rebound on 
withdrawal of a flexion stimulus have been 


supraspinatus and humeral head of triceps. 


Doubtless there are others but the above are those in which the 
phenomenon has been observed in the muscle when actually isolated. 
The muscles responsible for the rebound extension both in hind-limb 
and fore-limb so far as observed are those which as shown above 
participate by contraction in the extension phase of the reflex step. 
When therefore the flexion phase of the step bas been excited by an 
appropriate stimulus and in that way an incomplete step—incomplete 
because consisting of flexion phase only—has been produced, the reflex 
reaction is of itself competent to complete it in virtue of post-inhibitory 
rebound of the extensor centres giving the extension phase of the step. 
Taking the case where a stimulus excites reflex stepping with 
flexion as its opening phase, for instance in the hind-limb when the 
stimulus is applied to the contralateral fore-limb or to the pinna, or to 
ipsilateral funioulus gracilis of the cord. When the refractory phase 
arrives and the stimulus ceases to have its excitatory effect on the 
flexor centres of the limb it may be presumed that its reciprocal 
inhibitory effect on the extensor centres similarly ceases. Post- 
inhibitory exaltation then ensues in the extensor centres and a rebound 
discharge occurs from them producing the extensor phase of the step. 
But when the refractory phase is past excitation of the flexors with 


1 Lotos, 1888. 
® Arch. d. Sciences biologiques, St Pétersbourg. 1904. 
PH, XL. 


| 


7 
re 
— 
a 
+ 
— 
4 
ay 
7 
* 
d 
q 
8 
~ 
4 
4 


98 0. S. SHERRINGTON. 


inhibition of the extensors reappears, and a feature of rebound extension 
is the ease and promptitude with which it can be arrested by inhibition. 
An alternating reflex consisting of successive flexions and extensions 
will then result. 2 

And post- inhibitory rebounds are not confined to extension. On 
cessation of an extension stimulus rebound contraction of flexors is 
often seen, though in my experience of less common occurrence than 
extension rebound after reflex flexion. With the crossed extension 
reflex in the decerebrate preparation there not unfrequently occurs on 
withdrawal of the stimulus a flexion of the crossed limb synchronous 
with the rebound extension in the ipsilateral limb. Taking the case of 
the stepping reflex initiated in one hind-limb by stimulation of the 
contralateral foot or of the ipsilateral fore-foot, the opening phase of the 
reflex step is extension. On supervention of the refractory phase under 
this stimulation a flexor-rebound will execute flexion until the refractory 
phase is past when the external stimulus reacquiring its original power 
will produce extension again, the reflex thus becoming alternating. It 
was shown above that the extension of the limb tends to produce in the 
limb itself a stimulus excitatory of flexion. This stimulus exciting the 
flexors concurrently inhibits the motoneurons of the extensors. The 
interference of an intrinsic limb stimulus causing flexion with a distant 
continuously applied stimulus causing extension will convert the latter's 
effect into a rhythmic alternation of extension and flexion. 

iv. When the continuous remote (v. sup. p. 74) stimulus which 


- evokes the rhythmic reflex of the step is increased in intensity the 


stepping movement is not only more forcible but is quickened in 
rhythm. This is so both when the stimulus is applied to appropriate 
points of skin and when it is applied to the cross-section of the cervical 
cord itself. With intenser stimulus the refractory phase occurs sooner. 
This agrees with the view’ of Verworn, Baglioni, and F. Fröhlich 
who relate refractory phase to fatigue. But it is also compatible with 
the above view of the origination of the rhythm from two antagonistic 
stimuli a remote and an intrinsic which interfere. The more intense 
stimulus excites a quicker and more powerful opening phase of the 
step, and this tends more quickly and powerfully to generate the 
secondary proprioceptive reflex of the limb antagonistic to itself. A 
stronger step with higher frequency of rhythm in this way ensues. 
If two separately located distant stimuli provoking the stepping 


Biogenhypothese, Jena, 1908; Verworn’s Zeitschr. J. allg. Physiol. rv. 118, x. 110. 
Cf. also Verworn, ibid. v1. 11. 1906; and Fr. Fröhlich, ibid. vim. 893, 1908. 


5 
4 
* 
4 
4 
* 
— 
{ 
2 
E 


LIMB REFLEXES. 99 


reflex in a hind-limb be concurrently applied the result is an intensifica- 
tion of the stepping. This is so not only when the two stimuli are 
such as produce reflex stepping commencing with the same opening 
phase, but also when the two stimuli are such as to excite stepping of 
opposite opening phase, ie. flexion from one stimulus, extension from 
the other. On the view above given this is what would be expected 
since the excitation phase of one reflex reinforces the rebound phase of 
the other, and conversely. 

The observations indicate a difference between (a) the stimulation 
exciting the spinal step from distant skin-points or by direct faradisation 
of the cross-section of the cervical cord, and (8) the step-producing 
stimulation generated by simply allowing the hind-limb to drop pendent 
under its own weight. In the former case the primary stimulus 
although continuously in operation is interrupted in its effect by the 
rhythmic generation of a limb-reflex antagonistic to that which it itself 
excites. In the latter case a stimulus (passive extension) is applied 
which generates a reflex whose movement is opposed to the original 
passive one; and this active movement generates in its turn an active 
(reflex) movement opposed in sense to its immediate predecessor, and 
reinforced in its execution by the passive posture in which the animal 
is being held. In (8) two antagonistic reflexes alternate under 
alternation of two intermittent proprioceptive stimulations arising in 
the limb itself. In (a) one of the two intermittent proprioceptive 
stimulations is reinforced at each recurrence of it by a continuous 
distant stimulus and this latter by evoking the first phase of the 
whole movement originally initiated as well as continues to maintain 
the steps. | 

v. Influence from the crossed fellow limb. The reflex stepping of a 
limb is considerably helped by reflex stepping of the crossed fellow limb. 
This is readily observable in the spinal hind-limbs of the dog. When 
the animal is held clear of the ground with hind-limbs pendent under 
their own weight and the limbs performing stepping the passive arrest 
of one limb often stops the stepping in both. Arrest in a position of 
flexion at hip usually stops the movement more speedily than arrest in 
extension. When the reflex stepping is vigorous the passive arrest of 
one limb may not stop the stepping of the other, although it slows its 
rhythm. 

Stimuli which applied to the limb itself evoke from it flexion excite 
in the contralateral limb extension (Sect. 11). This holds equally for 
stimuli applied to the afferent nerves of the muscles of the limb 


te 
2 it 
4 
5 4 
4 
* 
* 
q 
> 
x 
‘ 
* 
* 


100 C. 8. SHERRINGTON. 


(Sect. 11). Passive flexion of one knee excites reflex lengthening of its 
own extensor muscles and reflex contraction of the extensors of the 
opposite knee. The flexion phase of the step in one limb therefore 
tends by a crossed reflex which it excites to reinforce the extension 
phase of the step in the other limb. a 

Extension of a bind-llir ib can also excite reflex flexion of the opposite 
hind-limb! ; this is so in spite of almost invariable failure to obtain such 
a crossed reflex by artificial stimuli applied direct to the afferent nerves 
(Sect. 11). Crossed flexion is however the usual result, as Magnus’ 
points out, when in the spinal hind-limbs of the dog, one limb being 
passively supported in flexion that limb is allowed to drop into extension 
under its own weight. Flexion of the crossed hip occurs almost as soon as 
the other limb drops. In this case the dropped limb very often appears 
to exhibit an active extension as it falls. This would be a “shortening 
reaction of extension of knee and probably of thigh. In this case an 
active extension of the dropping limb is accompanied by an active 
flexion of opposite hip (and knee). 

In view of the evidence in Sect. Ii it might be thought that the 
extension phase of the reflex step is simply a crossed reflex from the 
opposite limb. Such a supposition fails however to satisfy a number of 
facts. (1) The supporting of one thigh in the flexed posture often 
arrests the reflex stepping of both limbs, but it does not do so always. 
(2) In the spinal hind-limb (dog) skin lesions about the outer malleolus 
are apt to occur owing to pressure and rubbing in the stall. A common 
result of this is that the limb the seat of the lesion is retained in 
flexion at hip and knee, the lesion appearing to act as a chronic 
stimulus inducing continual ipsilateral flexion. Such a dog when held 
up from the ground performs the usual reflex stepping freely with one 
limb and much less freely with the limb the seat of the lesion. When 
such a dog is set on its feet it stands on its fore-limbs and on the spinal 
limb which is not the seat of the lesion. That is, it stands on three 
legs, the partially flexed limb being off the ground. All trace of 
stepping movement then ceases in the standing hind-limb, but in the 
other the stepping movement, though it sometimes ceases at once, often 
persists for twenty seconds or more before it gradually dies out. (3) 
A continued faradic stimulus applied to an afferent nerve of one of 
the spinal hind-limbs causing in that limb steady flexion maintained 
so long as the stimulus is continued, often excites regular stepping in 


. J. of Expt. Physiol. 11. 1909. ® Pfliiger’s Archiv, 1909. 
* Q. J. of Expt. Physiol. loc. cit, . 


d 
7 
4 
5 
Al 
* 
| 
i 
{ 
1 
‘ 
1 
| 
if 
| 
| 
} 
; 


LIMB REFLEXES. 101 


the crossed hind-limb though there is none in the ipsilateral’ (4) In 
the decapitated preparation faradisation of the cross-section about 
funioulus gracilis at first cervical level can excite stepping in the 
ipsilatera! hind-limb without stepping in the other hind-limb or in the 
fore-limbs. (5) After section of sciatic, femoralis and obturator nerves 
of one hind-limb stepping of the opposite hind-limb by itself may be 
obtained in the decapitate preparation by skin-stimulation of the base 
of the paralysed limb. 

Hence it seems clear that spinal stepping of the hind-limb can go on 
in absence of any reinforcement from the fellow hind-limb, although in 
bipedal stepping the stepping of each hind-limb does receive reflex 
reinforcement from the stepping of the other, and to a less extent from 
stepping of the fore-limbs (Sect. 11). 

As to deafferenting one hind-limb by severance of its afferent roots 
and the effect of this on the reflex stepping of that limb my observations 
are still incomplete. They make it clear however that a majority of the 
afferent roots of the limb may be severed and the limb still show 
stepping. Thus, in the decapitate preparation 14 days subsequent to 
section of 5th to 10th (inclusive) post-thoracic afferent roots together 
with posterior half of 4th, stimulation of perineal and prevulval skin 
excited stepping of both hind-limbs. Again, with 3rd to 8th (inclusive) 
post-thoracic afferent roots cut together with anterior half of 9th, fara- 
disation in the decapitate preparation of ipsilateral side of cervical cord 
at Ist cervical segment evoked distinct traces of stepping in the limb 
with cut afferent roots. The scratch-reflex of that limb was clearly 
obtained. Again, after section of 3rd to 10th (inclusive) post-thoracic 
afferent roots of left side traces of slow stepping of left limb were evoked 
from perineal skin. Here also passive alternate extensions and flexions 
of right limb produced regularly flexions and extensions of left, as in 
stepping. Skin stimuli appropriate for evoking stepping of left limb 
usually however produced simply the opening movement of a step 
in that limb and no further movement. The scratch-reflex of left 
limb was however well evoked both from skin of neck and by fara- 
disation of cross-section of cord at first cervical level. The above 
observations have been on the cat. In the dog Prof. Magnus and 
myself have to some extent repeated an experiment originally made by 
Philippson“, but in our experiment a considerable part of one of 
the afferent roots of the series escaped me in the operation, though 


1 Integrative Action of Nervous System, p. 66. 
2 International Congress of Physiologists, Heidelberg. 1907. 


* 
\ 
| 
4 
4 
> 
4 
a 


102 C. S SHERRINGTON. 


the missing of it was not observed by me at the time. The root 
only partially cut appears to have been the 6th lumbar. In a later 
experiment the roots were successfully cut from the 4th lumbar 
to 2nd sacral inclusive. In this case on the 5th day after the root 
sections sepsis appeared and the animal was thereupon destroyed. 
But the results as regards the stepping reflex were the same in both 
cases. On being held up with spine vertical and hind-limbs pendent 
the reflex stepping of the spinal hind-limbs appeared slightly different 
from what it had been before the severance of the afferent roots. 
The stepping was exhibited by both hind-limbs and the stepping 
movement was synchronous with opposite phase in the right and left 
limbs. Before the root severance passive support of one hip in flexion 
had usually arrested the stepping in both limbs. After the root 
severance (left limb) passive support of the right hip in flexion caused 
the stepping as before to cease in both hind-limbs, but similar passive 
support of the left hip made no obvious difference to the stepping 
movement of the right limb and did not stop it entirely in the left. 

7. The view at which the above observations arrive regarding the 
successive coordination of the reflex taxis of the spinal step may be 
summarised thus. It is a rhythmic reflex which may be excited by 
continuous stimuli applied either to various peripheral points outside 
the limb or to the cross-section of the spinal cord itself. In stepping 
a pair of antagonistic reflexes E and F alternately operate, the stimulus 
which generates and maintains the action is however not intermittent 
but continuous. The production of this intermittent reflex response 
from a continuous stimulus occurs in the following way. The primary 
generating stimulus excites its reflex movement of the limb. The 
reflex thus excited constitutes the opening phase of the step and is 
E or F according to the locus of the primary stimulus. The active 
movement thus executed excites in the limb a proprioceptive reflex 
diametricall y antagonistic to that of the primary stimulus. If the 
primary stimulus evoke E, this secondary reflex is F. Three main 
factors combine to produce the secondary reflex which interrupts the 
primary one ; (i) centripetal impulses from the deep structures passively 
moved by the primary reflex, (ii) centripetal impulses from the muscles 
actively used by the primary reflex, (iii) the central change underlying 
rebound in the spinal limb-centres reciprocally excited and inhibited 
by the primary stimulus. “Umkehr” has also to be reckoned with as 
an accessory factor. Also perhaps under certain circumstances the 
“ extensor-thrust.” When the secondary reflex is F the factor (i) is 


> 
‘ 
* 4 
| 
* 
« 
| 
* 


LIMB REFLEXES. 103 


especially marked; when the secondary reflex is E the factor (iii) is 
especially marked. Where the limb has been largely or completely 
deafferented by severance of its afferent roots factors (i) and (ii) fall 
out, but factor (iii) remains and there remain crossed effects of factors 
(i) and (ii) from the stepping fellow limb. 

When both limbs are engaged in reflex stepping the extensor phase 
of the step in one limb is reinforced by a crossed extension reflex whose 
stimulus arises in the flexion of the other limb; and similarly the flexion 
phase is reinforced by a crossed flexion-reflex derived from the other 
limb. The influence of the fore and aft limb-pairs on each other is less. 
The observations indicate that in natural stepping the excitatory 
influence descending from the brain to the spinal limb-centres is not 
intermittent but is continuous, although it results in rhythmic 
alternating movement of the limb. 


III. RxrIEX SraxDiIxd. 


1. Spinal. The execution of stepping movements by the limbs 
does not of course in itself amount to walking. For this latter act the 
reflex stepping of the limbs has to be combined with reflex maintenance 
of the erect posture of the body. In regard to this the question rises 
can the spinal preparation stand. In my experience the decapitate 
preparation (cat) certainly cannot stand. Placed in the erect posture it 
immediately sinks; limbs, neck and tail drop ; they are without power to 
antagonise gravity. The stepping movements of the limbs so readily 
excited in this preparation are ineffective for locomotion ; the extension 
phase of the step is usually unable to straighten the limbs effectively 
under the superincumbent weight of the body. : 

But a different condition is observable after a period has elapsed 
following the spinal transection, eg. at 10th thoracic level. In the 
course of some months or weeks the hind-limbs become able to stand 
(dog). If placed symmetrically in the standing posture with the hind- 
feet together and the fore-limbs supported by an assistant, the hind-limbs 
are found capable of maintaining the extended posture and supporting 
the weight of the hindquarters, even for minutes at a time. In some 
experiments as was mentioned above the standing can be executed by 
one hind-limb without help from the other, so that the animal stands on 
three legs, but such standing lasts in my experience only for a short 
time, rarely a full minute. Spinal standing is subject to sudden lapses. 


1 Cf. Philippson. International Congress of Physiologists, Heidelberg, p. 180. 1907. 


2 
> 
* 
« 
i 
a 
¢. 
— 
* 


104 C. S. SHERRINGTON. 


At times by no device can the spinal limbs be made to stand. And 
there is little latitude in the exact pose of the limbs compatible with 
the standing. In my experience the limbs need to be symmetrically 
placed, and there must be no wide departure from the vertical. In 
short there is in the tonic reflex which maintains standing in the purely 
spinal condition little of that plasticity which the natural act exhibits. 

2. Decerebrate. If however we turn to the decerebrate preparation 
the condition is different. The state of that preparation is as regards 
the innervation of its skeletal musculature more constant and homo- 
geneous than that of the decapitate or spinal. The decerebrate 
preparation is exhibiting a steady reflex in continuous operation. It is 
in a state of reflex equilibrium such as the purely spinal preparation 
rarely approaches to. In the decerebrate preparation there obtains a 
characteristic rigidity’. The limb muscles are stiffened by tonic reflex 
action to the extent that they successfully counteract the weight of 
the body. In short in the limbs a static reflex is in progress. A tonic 
reflex keeps the limbs extended, the neck and tail lifted, the back and 
head horizontal, and the lower jaw closed against the upper. This 
reflex rigidity maintains the preparation in a definite posture. The tonic 
contraction which thus maintains a reflex attitude does not involve all 
muscles in the limb and other regions; it is confined to certain muscles 
and is absent from the antagonists of these (Sect. III, p. 60). It is 
present in the extensors of the limb, the retractors of the head, and the 
elevators of neck and tail and lower jaw. The tonic reflex contraction 
is therefore confined to those muscles which counteract gravity in the 
usual erect posture of the animal. And the grade of contraction of 
these muscles in the decerebrate state commonly just suffices to support 
the creature in the erect attitude when passively set upright. This 
static reflex though its effect covers a wide field of musculature is 
nevertheless a homogeneous entity. The tonic excitation produced by 
it is distributed to muscles which form one functional system compassing 
one common result, namely, the counteracting of gravity in those parts 
whose weight has to be duly supported for the maintenance of the 
erect posture of the animal. The source whence proceed the centripetal 
impulses maintaining this reflex has been traced to be in those muscles 
which themselves exhibit the tonic reflex contraction. The reflex arises 
therefore from a source which is itself of unitary functional character, 
namely, that system of muscles which in the erect posture of the animal 
antagonises the displacements which gravity would produce. This 

1 This Journal, Xu. 339. 


7 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
* 
| 


LIMB REFLEXES. 105 


reflex employs a pre-spiual centre situate between anterior colliculus 
and hind edge of pons. It ceases when that region is removed. 
Originated via one particular set of proprioceptive afferents and 
subserving one unitary purpose the reaction constitutes a single though 
composite proprioceptive reflex. 

In it, as in the kinetic reflexes (flexion-reflex, crossed extension 
reflex) analysed above, reciprocal innervation of antagonistic muscles 
seems to obtain. The tonic excitation is supplied only to one member, 
the extensor, of antagonistic muscle pairs. There is evidence that the 
flexors are under a mild tonic inhibition, the counterpart of the tonic 
excitation of the extensor motoneurons. 


(1) The reflex contractions of the flexors in decerebrate rigidity show less prolonged 
after-discharge than they show in the purely spinal condition. (2) The threshold 
stimulus for reflex contraction of the flexors of the limb is often seen to be slightly lower 
in the decapitated preparation than in the decerebrate. (3) Alternating reflexe
