 
 
This is an Accepted Article that has been peer-reviewed and approved for publication in the The Journal of 
Physiology, but has yet to undergo copy-editing and proof correction. Please cite this article as an 'Accepted 
Article'; doi: 10.1113/JP270228. 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   1 
 
 
A neural circuitry that emphasizes spinal feedback 
generates diverse behaviours of human locomotion 
 
Seungmoon Song* and Hartmut Geyer* 
 
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA 
{smsong, hgeyer}@cs.cmu.edu 
*corresponding author 
 
 
Key points 
 It is often assumed that central pattern generators, which generate rhythmic patterns without 
rhythmic inputs, play a key role in the spinal control of human locomotion. 
 We propose a neural control model, in which the spinal control generates muscle stimulations 
mainly with integrated reflex pathways with no central pattern generator. 
 Using a physics-based neuromuscular human model, we show that this control network is 
sufficient to compose steady and transitional 3D locomotion behaviours including walking 
and running, acceleration and deceleration, slope and stair negotiation, turning, and deliberate 
obstacle avoidance. 
 The results suggest feedback integration to be functionally more important than central 
pattern generation in human locomotion across behaviours. 
 In addition, the proposed control architecture may serve as a guide in the search for the 
neurophysiological origin and circuitry of spinal control in humans. 
Word count: 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   2 
 
 
Abstract 
Neural networks along the spinal cord contribute substantially to generating locomotion behaviours in 
humans and other legged animals. However, the neural circuitry involved in this spinal control 
remains unclear. We here propose a specific circuitry that emphasizes feedback integration over 
central pattern generation. The circuitry is based on neurophysiologically plausible muscle-reflex 
pathways that are organized in ten spinal modules realizing limb functions essential to legged systems 
in stance and swing. These modules are combined with a supraspinal control layer that adjusts the 
desired foot placements and selects the leg that is to transition into swing control during double 
support. Using physics-based simulation, we test the proposed circuitry in a neuromuscular human 
model that includes neural transmission delays, musculotendon dynamics, and compliant foot-ground 
contacts. We find that the control network is sufficient to compose steady and transitional 3D 
locomotion behaviours including walking and running, acceleration and deceleration, slope and stair 
negotiation, turning, and deliberate obstacle avoidance. The results suggest feedback integration to be 
functionally more important than central pattern generation in human locomotion across behaviours. 
In addition, the proposed control architecture may serve as a guide in the search for the 
neurophysiological origin and circuitry of spinal control in human. 
Abbreviations 
BFSH, short head of biceps femoris; CE, contractile element; COM, centre of mass; CPG, central 
pattern generator; DOF, degree of freedom; EMG, electromyogram; GAS, gastrocnemius; GLU, 
glutei; GRF, ground reaction force; HAB, hip abductor; HAD, hip adductor; HAM, hamstring; HFL, 
hip flexor; MTU, muscle tendon units; PE parallel elasticity; RF, rectus femoris; SE, series elasticity; 
SOL, soleus; TA, tibialis anterior; VAS, vastii. 
Introduction 
Humans show a range of locomotion behaviours from walking and running to stair and slope 
negotiation to turning and deliberate obstacle avoidance. Experimental evidence has established that 
neural networks along the spinal cord contribute substantially to generating these behaviours in 
humans and other legged animals (Grillner, 2006; Bizzi et al., 2008; Gerasimenko et al., 2008; 
Harkema et al., 2011); however, the specific neural circuitry involved in this spinal control remains 
unclear. The current main ideas about what this circuitry is composed of revolve around central 
pattern generators (CPGs) and muscle synergies. CPGs are mutually inhibiting neural circuits in the 
spinal cord (Guertin, 2009) that can produce rhythmic patterns of neural activity without rhythmic 
inputs (Ijspeert, 2008). Animal experiments have confirmed the existence of CPG networks in 
invertebrates (Orlovsky et al., 1999). They have also shown mammals performing locomotion-like 
rhythmic limb movements in the absence of both supraspinal and peripheral inputs (Brown, 1911; 
Grillner and Zangger, 1979; Rossignol et al., 2008), although their CPG network remains a black box 
(Guertin, 2009). Muscle synergies can be viewed as a generalization of CPGs, providing the 
flexibility to compose more than just rhythmic behaviour (Ijspeert, 2008). They are proposed control 
modules located in the spinal cord that activate a group of muscles in a fixed balance (Bizzi et al., 
2008; Tresch and Jarc, 2009). Using computational factorization algorithms, several research groups 
have shown that only a handful of synergies would be required to explain the muscle activities found 
in different animals and humans for locomotion behaviours from swimming to balancing to walking 
(Tresch et al., 1999; Cheung et al., 2005; Ivanenko et al., 2004; Torres-Oviedo and Ting, 2007; 
Dominici et al., 2011). Recent physiological evidence supports the existence of synergies (Bizzi and 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   3 
 
Cheung, 2013), but similar to CPGs, the neural origin and circuitry of synergies remains debated 
(Tresch and Jarc, 2009; Kutch and Valero-Cuevas, 2012).  
     Using a physics-based neuromuscular human model, we here propose a specific neural circuitry to 
compose a range of locomotion behaviours. Most previous human model studies that propose a neural 
control architecture emphasize spinal pattern generation (Taga et al., 1991; Taga, 1998; Ogihara and 
Yamazaki, 2001; Hase et al., 2003; Paul et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011). In these models, mutually 
inhibiting neurons (Matsuoka, 1985) are combined to a number of CPGs that generate spinal, 
oscillatory outputs at each joint of the lower limbs. Although the activity of the CPG models is altered 
in timing and amplitude by feedback from muscle, skin and joint sensors, as well as from the 
vestibular system (Hase et al., 2003; Paul et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011), the functional importance of 
these sensory feedback pathways to generating locomotion behaviours is not explicitly addressed.  
     Here we show that sensory feedback integration, without spinal pattern generation, is sufficient to 
generate human locomotion across behaviours. We develop a three-dimensional human 
neuromuscular model that generalizes the muscle reflex circuitry of a previous sagittal plane model 
(Geyer and Herr, 2010). In particular, we replace the previous model's swing phase reflexes with a 
functionally more relevant reflex circuitry of swing leg placement (Desai and Geyer, 2012, 2013; 
Song et al., 2013), and integrate muscle reflexes for hip abduction and adduction (Song and Geyer, 
2013). The resulting control is organized in ten, mainly independent spinal feedback modules that 
realize limb functions essential to legged locomotion. In addition, we incorporate a higher layer, 
longer latency control that can alter some of the reflex gains. This supraspinal control adjusts the 
desired foot placements (Kajita et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2007) and selects the leg that is to transition 
into swing control during double support. Using computer optimization of the model's control 
parameters, we find that the control network is sufficient to compose steady and transitional 3D 
locomotion behaviours including walking and running, acceleration and deceleration, slope and stair 
negotiation, turning, and deliberate obstacle avoidance. (An accompanying video demonstrates these 
behaviours.) The results support the hypothesis that feedback integration is functionally more 
important than central pattern generation in human locomotion across behaviours. In addition, the 
proposed control architecture may serve as a guide in the search for the neurophysiological origin and 
circuitry of spinal control in humans. 
Methods 
We develop a human locomotion model, which extends a previous sagittal plane model of the human 
neuromuscular system (Geyer and Herr, 2010) to a three-dimensional version with additional muscles 
and foot geometry (Fig. 1) as well as with a neural control circuitry organized in ten functional, spinal 
reflex modules (Fig. 3) and a higher layer adjusting the foot placement (Fig. 2). 
Musculoskeletal mechanics 
The model represents a 180 cm tall person weighing 80 kg with seven segments connected by eight 
internal degrees of freedom (DOFs) and actuated by 22 muscle tendon units (MTUs) (Fig. 1). The 
segments include the trunk describing the whole upper body and the thighs, shanks and feet with 
geometric and inertial properties estimated from human data (Tab. 2, Appendix A). Revolute joints 
connect the segments with two DOFs at the hips (pitch and roll) and one DOF at the knees and ankles 
(pitch only). Each leg is actuated by 11 Hill-type MTUs. Nine MTUs actuate the three sagittal plane 
pitch joints (Fig. 1A) modelling the lumped hip flexors (HFL), the glutei (GLU), the hamstrings 
(HAM), the rectus femoris (RF), the vastii (VAS), the short head of the biceps femoris (BFSH), the 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   4 
 
gastrocnemius (GAS), the soleus (SOL), and the tibialis anterior (TA). The remaining two MTUs, 
modelling the hip abductors (HAB) and adductors (HAD), actuate the hip roll joints (Fig. 1B). 
Muscle tendon units. The MTU model is detailed in Geyer and Herr (2010). Each MTU consists of a 
contractile element (CE) and series (SE) and parallel elasticities (PE). The MTU force    is 
calculated solving               , where the active CE exerts a force 
            (   )  (   ) with      being the maximum isometric force,   (   ) and   (   ) being 
the force-length and force-velocity relationships, and    being the muscle activation. Muscle 
activation is generated by a first-order delay from muscle stimulation   , which is the output of the 
spinal control modules. The physiological differences between the MTUs are captured with four 
parameters including the maximum isometric force     , the maximum contraction velocity      of 
the CE, the optimal CE length     , and the SE slack length       . For each MTU, these properties are 
estimated from human data (Tab. 3, Appendix A). 
Instantaneous moment arms. A muscle force    generates a torque      ( )   at the joints the 
muscle spans, where   ( ) is the instantaneous moment arm. All moment arms are matched to 
reported physiological data (Visser et al., 1990; Arnold et al., 2010; Geyer and Herr, 2010; 
McCullough et al., 2011), using either a constant value or a scaled cosine relationship (Tab. 4, 
Appendix A). 
Foot-ground contacts. The musculoskeletal system interacts with the ground via four compliant 
contact models on each foot (Fig. 1C). The contact points are located at the edges of the foot segment 
in the sagittal plane representing the heel as well as the ball and toe region of a human foot. In the 
frontal plane, the contact points are 10 cm apart at the ball and 5 cm apart at the heel. If a contact 
point touches the ground, ground reaction forces (GRFs) act on the foot segment at that point. The 
normal GRF is calculated as nonlinear spring-damper force. The tangential GRF acts in either static or 
sliding mode, where static friction is modelled as nonlinear spring-damper force, and sliding friction 
is proportional to the normal GRF (for details, see Song and Geyer, 2013). 
Neural control circuitry 
The neural circuitry of the human model is organized into spinal reflex modules combined with a 
supraspinal layer. The spinal modules realize individual limb functions essential to legged systems 
with decentralized feedback control. The supraspinal layer adjusts the desired foot placements and 
modulates some of the spinal reflexes (Fig. 2A). The inputs to this hierarchical control structure 
include the muscle states such as the length, velocity or force of the contractile elements, joint states 
such as knee angle and angular velocity, the ground contact information, as well as the trunk's centre 
of mass (COM) position and velocity relative to the stance foot, and the leg angles and the global 
trunk lean. The outputs are the muscle stimulations    [    
       
      
       
 ] of the left (L) 
and right leg (R) generated by the spinal reflex modules. 
Reflex control modules. Each leg's muscles are controlled by ten reflex modules    through     
based on their functional role in stance (   to   ) or swing (   to    ) (Fig. 2A). In addition, if a 
leg is selected by the supraspinal layer to switch from stance control to swing control during the 
transitional double support phase, some of the stance control modules can be inhibited (   and   ) 
and some of the swing control modules can be excited (   and   ) in proportion to contralateral leg 
loading. For most muscles, the resulting net stimulation is generated by several control modules that 
can be active simultaneously. We here summarize the function of each module and detail their 
implementation in Appendix B. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   5 
 
 
     The stance control is taken from (Geyer and Herr, 2010) with modifications for some modules and 
an extension for lateral trunk balance (Fig. 3). The first key function of the stance control is to 
robustly generate compliant leg behaviour. Module    realizes compliant leg behaviour using 
positive force feedbacks (  ) of the leg extensors (GLU, VAS and SOL). As compliant behaviour of 
segmented legs is prone to buckling (Seyfarth et al., 2001),    prevents knee hyperextension by 
positive force feedbacks of the biarticular knee flexors (HAM and GAS) throughout stance and by 
exciting the monoarticular knee flexor (BFSH) while reciprocally inhibiting the knee extensor (VAS) 
with muscle length feedbacks (  ) if the knee approaches hyperextension. The second key function of 
the stance control is to maintain trunk balance.    is the main module realizing this behaviour by 
activating the hip antagonists in the sagittal (HFL, GLU and HAM) and frontal planes (HAB and 
HAD) based on an assumed vestibular or visual feedback of the trunk pitch (  ) and roll (  ) in the 
world frame. (   in the    panel of Fig. 3A indicates that HAM is co-stimulated in proportion to the 
stimulation of GLU.) The intensity of the    output is modulated by sensory feedback of the load    
on the ipsilateral leg to prevent it from slipping due to exaggerated hip torques. In addition, the 
module    compensates for the moment induced on the trunk by the contralateral swing leg by co-
stimulating the ipsilateral leg's antagonist hip muscles in the sagittal plane and agonist hip muscles in 
the frontal plane (  ).  
     The last spinal module active in stance control,   , is also active in swing control and serves a 
dual purpose. It uses muscle length feedback (  ) of the ankle flexor (TA) to generate foot ground 
clearance in swing and to prevent ankle hyperextension in stance. In stance control, this length 
feedback is inhibited reciprocally by negative force feedback (  ) from the ankle extensor (SOL) to 
reduce unnecessary antagonistic activation. 
     The main part of the swing control composed of modules       is adapted from Desai and Geyer 
(2013) (Fig. 3). Its key functions are to generate sufficient ground clearance and to robustly place the 
leg into target angles in the sagittal and frontal planes. The desired minimum leg length,     , for 
ground clearance and target angles      [    
      
 ]
 
 are provided to the spinal layer by 
supraspinal inputs (Fig. 2A). Throughout swing, module    drives the hip muscles (HFL and GLU, 
HAB and HAD) in proportion to the errors in leg angles           to control swing leg 
placement. For the frontal plane, the error is provided as muscle length feedback (  ) from the hip 
abductor and adductor, HAB and HAD, interpreting the offset      in the length feedback signal 
               as a means to adjust the target angle via  -motoneuron stimulation (not shown in Fig. 
3A). A similar length feedback (  ) of the biarticular muscles spanning the hip and knee, HAM and 
RF, provides an estimate of the leg angle error in the sagittal plane (shown in Fig. 3A). 
     The remaining swing leg modules control the knee to achieve ground clearance and return to leg 
extension when approaching the target angle (Fig. 3A). Module    uses velocity feedback from RF 
(estimating sagittal leg angular velocity  ̇  ) to the monoarticular knee flexor BFSH to ensure initial 
knee flexion. Module    uses length feedback of VAS (  ) to monitor leg length, again interpreting 
the length offset          as the desired minimum leg length      which can be adjusted by   -
motoneuron activity. When VAS stretches past the offset (the leg shortens below     ) (    in Fig. 
3B),    deactivates    and dampens the knee motion with positive velocity feedbacks (  ) of VAS 
on RF and of BFSH on itself, accounting for the fact that muscles can only pull. (BFSH is further 
modulated by feedback from RF to allow the knee to passively extend when    approaches its target). 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   6 
 
The sagittal leg angle    is monitored simultaneously with length feedbacks of HAM and RF. When 
   as measured by HAM passes a threshold close to the target value     
  (   ),    begins to use 
positive length feedback (  ) of HAM to decelerate the leg angular motion. At the same time, when 
   passes this target as measured by RF (   ),    is deactivated. Finally, once the leg starts to retract 
( ̇    , detected by velocity feedback of HAM;    ), module     engages and uses positive length 
feedbacks (  ) of the hip muscles (GLU and HFL) and the knee extensor (VAS) to extend the leg 
(VAS) and hold it close to the targeted angle (GLU and HFL). 
     If a leg is selected by the supraspinal layer to switch from stance control to swing control during 
the double support phase, the outputs of modules    and    for the hip and knee muscles are 
inhibited by proportional feedback of the contralateral leg force    to terminate stance (shown as a 
factor      in Fig. 3B). (   and    remain unmodified for the ankle muscles to provide ankle push 
off). At the same time,    and    are proportionally excited by the same contralateral force to initiate 
swing. The modulation with    guarantees that the transition from stance to swing control occurs only 
if the body weight transfers to the contralateral leg. 
Supraspinal control layer. The supraspinal control layer adjusts the desired foot placements in swing. 
It selects the leg that is to transition into swing control in double support and provides to the spinal 
cord layer the desired minimum leg length      for ground clearance and the desired foot placement in 
the form of target leg angles      in the sagittal and frontal planes (Fig. 2A). Several approaches have 
been proposed to compute desired foot placements for dynamic balance in 3D walking and running 
(Raibert and Tello, 1986; Kajita et al., 2001; Yin et al., 2007;Wu and Geyer, 2013). We adapt the 
heuristic approach of Yin et al. (2007) due to its simplicity. For instance, the desired leg angle of the 
left leg (L) in the sagittal plane (s) is calculated as       
      
    
   
       
 , where   
    is the angle 
that the sagittal hip-ankle line forms with the horizontal plane of the world frame  ;   
 ,   
  and     are 
positive constants; and   
  and   
  are the time-delayed horizontal position and velocity of the COM 
relative to the ankle of the right foot (Fig. 2B). Four different target angles are computed accounting 
for the sagittal and frontal planes of the left and right leg. The resulting target angle vector     
  
[      
          
          
          
   ]
 
 is sent to the spinal layer in body frame coordinates,          
   . 
     If the legs are in double support, the supraspinal layer additionally selects the leg whose control is 
to transition into swing based on the distance of the leg angles to their targets (Fig. 2C). For each leg, 
the leg angle distance is calculated as ‖      ‖  {(    
    )
 
 (    
    )
 
}
   
, and the next 
swing leg is chosen to be the one whose angle distance is larger, as the other leg is better positioned to 
balance the trunk in stance. Both the swing leg selection and the target angle vector      are updated 
continuously, allowing the supraspinal layer to react to disturbances throughout the gait cycle. 
Neural transmission delays. All neural connections are time delayed to reflect physiological 
constraints on neural transmission speed (Meunier et al., 1990; Grey et al., 2001; Knikou and Rymer, 
2002) (Fig. 1D). The one way delay between the supraspinal system and the spinal cord is set to 
       ms. The delays projecting between the spinal cord and the areas of the hip, knee and ankle 
are set to short, medium and long delays with         ms,      ms, and       ms. The total 
delay of a neural circuit results from the delays of its individual connections. For example, the delay 
of the positive force feedback of the ankle extensor SOL in module    is          ms, and the 
delay of the positive velocity feedback from RF to BFSH in module    is          ms. 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   7 
 
 
Implementation and behaviour optimization 
We implement the neuromuscular model in the MATLAB Simulink/SimMechanics environment 
(R2013a) with the ode15s solver (max step size of 10ms, relative and absolute error tolerance of 1e-3 
and 1e-4, respectively) and optimize the control parameters with the covariance matrix adaptation 
evolution strategy (Hansen, 2006) to test the versatility of the proposed neural control circuitry in 
generating locomotion behaviours. The circuitry has 82 control parameters (7 for the reactive foot 
placement, 40 for stance reflexes, 31 for swing reflexes, and 4 for the modulation in the control 
transition). The simulation runs at about real time on a modern desktop computer, and a typical 
optimization run with a population size of 16 parameter individuals evolving over 400 generations 
takes about one day. 
     A successful optimization run required proper initial parameters as solutions can get stuck in local 
minima. For energy efficient walking (see next paragraph), we hand tuned the initial parameters based 
on our intuition about walking from similar models (Song and Geyer 2012). During this hand tuning 
process, which involved about 10 optimization runs, we encountered different solutions in local 
minima with substantially higher energy cost and largely different joint kinematics and kinetics. Once 
we had found a suitable initial parameter set, the optimization consistently converged to solutions 
with similar kinematics, kinetics and energetic costs. With this initial parameter set, single 
optimization runs were sufficient to find most of the other target behaviours. Exceptions were some of 
the more complex behaviours, for which we chained several optimization runs. This process used the 
result of one optimization in the next (for example, we used the solution for fast walking to find speed 
transitions from fast to slow walking), which could take up to one week to compute. 
     The cost function has a similar structure for all investigated behaviours. It consists of three parts, 
 
  {
                 
                            
   ‖         ‖                   
 
(1a) 
(1b) 
(1c) 
with the first two parts encouraging the model not to fall down first (Eq. 1a, falling distance      ) and 
then to achieve steady locomotion (Eq. 1b). The steadiness measure         is the summed 
differences of the relative Cartesian positions of the segment edges at touch down. Based on previous 
tests, the model is considered in steady locomotion if this sum is smaller than 10 cm for six 
consecutive steady steps (Song and Geyer, 2012). The last part (Eq. 1c) is task specific and 
encourages energy efficient locomotion (energetic cost   ) at a target velocity      [             ], 
where the frontal plane target speed         , and      is the average velocity over the last six 
steady steps. The constant        ensures Eq. 1a   1b   1c. The energetic cost is calculated as 
   
  
 ‖           ‖, where    is the metabolic energy consumed by all muscles (Umberger et al., 
2003),   is the body mass, and ‖           ‖ is the distance traveled in the horizontal plane. The 
values of      and    are calculated over the last six consecutive steps of steady walking. 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   8 
 
 
Results 
We first confirm that the proposed reflex circuitry reproduces human walking behaviour (Figs. 4 and 
5), then explore the contributions of the individual control modules (Figs. 5 and 6), and finally show 
the versatility of the reflex circuitry in generating other locomotion behaviours by supra-spinal 
modulation (Figs. 7). 
Quality of walking behaviour 
The reflex circuitry generates walking with overall human-like kinematics, dynamics, and muscle 
activation patterns, although the energy optimization leads to a lower quality match than obtained in 
the previous work (Geyer and Herr, 2010). Figure 4 shows the joint kinematics and dynamics and the 
GRFs obtained from optimizing the control parameters with the cost function (Eq. 1) for a normal 
human walking speed of 1.2 m s-1. Some differences to the human walking patterns are introduced by 
the simplified structure of the skeletal model. For instance, the reduction of the entire upper body to a 
rigid segment neglects soft, force buffering structures in the human trunk and leads to higher impact 
forces and larger trunk motions after heel strike (i, Fig. 4). Also, the lack of a toe segment results in 
more plantar flexion in late stance (ii). These differences (i, ii) have also been observed in the 
previous, planar model (Geyer and Herr, 2010). However, the energy optimization introduces 
additional differences. The model now tends to straighten the knee early in stance (iii), known to 
generate more energy-efficient solutions in gait optimization (Ackermann and van den Bogert, 2010; 
Umberger, 2010). The early straightening induces less dorsiflexion at the ankle and excessive roll at 
the hip (iv). Both differences (iii) and (iv) are not observed when the model is optimized to match the 
reference kinematics instead of minimizing the energetic cost (not shown). 
     With the exception of HAD, the correlation coefficients between predicted and observed activation 
patterns lie within the range found in human experiments (average R = 0.40-0.81 for inter-subject 
comparison, Wren et al., 2006) (Fig. 5a,b). Compared to the previous planar model, the energy 
optimization slightly reduces the quality of the match for the ankle muscles (SOL, GAS and TA; R   
0.80). On the other hand, the functionally improved spinal circuitry leads to a better match for the hip 
flexor (HFL) throughout the gait cycle (R = 0.86), now generates VAS activity in stance preparation 
at the end of swing, and captures the overall activation patterns of the added muscles BFSH and RF, 
although the onset of RF activity is late by about 10% of the gait cycle. The largest difference 
between predicted and observed activity occurs for the added hip adductors (HAD, R = 0.32), whose 
exclusive action on the hip roll DOF in the model likely over-simplifies the action and control of hip 
adductors in humans. 
     While the quality of the fit improves by including, for instance, reference kinematics in the 
optimization goals, energy optimization provides a sufficient cost criterion to generate overall human 
locomotion behaviour without requiring reference data. It thus allows us to explore the behaviours 
that the spinal control circuitry can produce. 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   9 
 
 
Contributions of spinal modules 
The spinal modules combine to shape the activation patterns of individual muscles in ways that can 
obscure the interpretation of EMGs in experiments (Fig. 5C). Some modules contribute similarly to a 
muscle's activation. For instance, the modules for compliant stance leg behaviour (  ) and trunk 
balance (  ) contribute similar activation profiles for HAB, suggesting that a single peak of EMG 
activity in humans does not have to equal a single functionality. The peak can instead result from 
executing multiple functional goals at the same time. Other modules compete. The HAM activity in 
the late double support is nearly flat (Fig. 5B), because the excitation provided by the balance module 
   is suppressed by module   , which protects against knee hyperextension (Fig. 5C). Thus, it can 
be misleading to equate flat muscle EMGs with the absence of control. Finally, the late swing 
activities of HAM and VAS provide an example in which apparently similar activation features across 
muscles are generated by different control modules (the stopping module    for HAM and the leg 
holding module     for VAS).   
     Not all of the proposed control modules seem to contribute in steady walking, however. To test if 
they matter, we subject the neuromuscular model to disturbances. We train the model on rough terrain 
(40 m long track with random height changes up to  10 cm during the middle 20m portion; similar to 
Fig. 1) with the cost function (Eq. 1), searching for energy efficient walking that can tolerate 
disturbances. We find that the trained control is robust enough to let the model traverse randomly 
generated terrains (success rate  50% up to  6-cm-terrains) as well as withstand substantial 
horizontal pushes (Tab. 1) with a steady state gait that is slightly faster than before (1.4 m s-1 vs. 1.2 m 
s-1) and less energy optimal (metabolic cost of 6.2 J kg -1 m-1 vs. 5.0 J kg-1 m-1). Note that the model 
can be trained to walk on rougher terrain, but the resulting gait clearly deviates from normal 
locomotion and is not investigated here. We then subject the trained model to walking on flat and 
rough terrain and record the peak muscle activations that each module contributes. 
     The comparison shows that some swing leg modules which do not seem needed in steady walking 
become important when rejecting disturbances (Fig. 6). At no instant in steady walking (grey bars), 
the modules   ,    and     contributed more than 2% of activation to any muscle. All three 
modules are related to swing leg control with    supporting early knee flexion,     holding the leg 
before stance, and    compensating for moments induced on the trunk (Fig. 3). Their negligible 
activities reveal that the optimization converged on an energy-efficient solution with a nearly passive 
knee in swing. Although this ballistic walking style (Mochon and McMahon, 1980) makes these 
modules seem unneeded, they become highly active in rough terrain (black bars), playing a major part 
in placing the swing leg (   , encountered peak activation of 100 %) and stabilizing the trunk (   , 36% 
peak activation). Module     is the exception. It does not meaningfully increase peak activity (1%), 
suggesting that the human stance preparation of hip and knee extensors (Perry and Burnfield, 2010) is 
not critical to gait robustness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   10 
 
 
Behaviour diversity 
The proposed spinal control modules are sufficient to generate a range of steady and unsteady 
locomotion behaviours observed in humans (Fig. 7). Characteristic human locomotion behaviours 
range from walking and running to stair and slope negotiation to turning and deliberate obstacle 
avoidance. Optimization for different terrains with the cost function Eq. 1 identifies control parameter 
sets that generate steady behaviours including slope ascent (  8%) and descent (  24%) as well as 
stair ascent (10 cm risers with 40 cm treads). With different target speeds in Eq. 1c, the control 
network further generates walking at speeds ranging from 0.8 m s-1 to 1.8 m s-1 (not shown), which 
covers human slow and fast walking (Murray et al., 1984), and running steps at 3ms-1, although the 
model falls after about 20 m (Fig.7A). In addition, using different constant parameter sets for the left 
and right leg (and replacing the velocity term in cost function in Eq. 1c with a cost term that seeks to 
maximize the change in trunk yaw), the control generates steady turning motions with the smallest 
radius of about 6.5 m. (The lack of yaw joints in the hips of the model likely prevents smaller radii as 
it has to slide about the stance foot to produce yaw motion. This shortcoming affects the performance 
of most behaviours. In humans, the internal yaw joints of the hips and trunk are used even in normal 
walking (Stokes et al, 1989). It is likely that adding these internal DOFs would help the model to 
achieve sharper turns, a larger range of walking speeds, and stable running—see below.) 
     To test whether the control architecture of the spinal modules produces unsteady locomotion 
behaviours, we allow the optimization to change the control parameters sets at heel strike between 
individual steps (Fig. 7B). With two such step changes in the control parameters, the model can make 
large changes in walking speed from 0.8 m s-1 to 1.7 m s-1 and from 1.8 m s-1 to 1.1 m s-1, and change 
the walking direction with a maximum turning angle of 50 deg. In both cases, the speed and direction 
changes appear only after the steps with the control parameter changes, suggesting that earlier steps 
should not be overlooked in gait analysis when studying these behaviours. Expanding the control 
changes to multiple steps, the model can also avoid obstacles by increasing the foot ground clearance 
or the step size. For example, in the sequence shown in figure 7B, the model approaches from steady 
walking, passes within eight steps of altered control a 10 cm high obstacle followed by a 75 cm wide 
obstacle, and then returns to steady walking. 
     Except for stair walking and running, all steady and unsteady behaviours have been generated 
without changing individual muscle reflex parameters in swing. It is sufficient to keep the swing 
reflex parameters used for energy efficient walking, and to generate the different swing leg behaviours 
by altering the supraspinal commands of the desired minimum leg length,     , and the desired target 
leg angle,     . (Note that since only the swing leg control is structured in a hierarchy with few 
supraspinal parameters, we always allowed the optimization to change all stance reflex parameters.) 
For instance, down slope walking was generated using the smallest desired leg length,      = 75 cm, 
whereas normal walking used      = 87 cm. Similarly, target angles ranged from      = 59 deg in fast 
walking to      = 72 deg for descending slopes. In contrast, for walking upstairs and running adjusting 
only      and      was insufficient. For these behaviours the gains of the feedback pathways which 
stimulate HFL in    needed to be largely increased, because a stronger hip swing is required to lift 
the thigh up in walking upstairs and to rapidly advance the leg in running. This additional adjustment 
suggests that the intensity of the swing should be part of the supraspinal control layer. 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   11 
 
 
     The optimization did not find a solution for walking down stairs (10 cm risers and 40 cm treads), 
pointing to a limitation of the current stance leg control. To lower the centre of mass down stairs, leg 
propulsion in late stance needs to be tempered, which could be achieved by lowering the feedback 
gains in module    during the late stance phase. However, this gain adjustment will require 
organizing the stance control into a hierarchy with supraspinal modulation. 
     Changes in the optimized reflex gains for the different behaviours reveal several functional 
candidates for such a supraspinal modulation of the stance control. One candidate for supraspinal 
modulation is the target trunk lean,     , in the balance module   . For instance, walking up stairs 
required a target trunk pitch of     
  = 22 deg as compared to 2-7 deg for all other behaviours. 
Including the target trunk lean in the supraspinal control layer seems a natural choice given that it is 
related to the vestibular and vision systems. Another candidate is the modulation of the force feedback 
gain of VAS, which tends to increase for walking behaviours with higher leg impacts (walking fast, 
down slope, or on rough terrain). The force feedback of VAS is part of module    responsible for 
generating compliant leg behaviour. Changing the VAS gain will change the leg stiffness, a functional 
adaptation important to human locomotion (Ferris et al., 1998, Lipfert et al., 2012). 
Discussion 
We proposed a specific neural circuitry involved in the spinal control of human locomotion 
behaviours. The circuitry is organized in ten muscle-reflex modules that realize limb functions 
essential to legged systems in stance and swing. We then implemented these modules in a three-
dimensional human neuromuscular model in combination with a supraspinal control layer that adjusts 
the desired foot placements and adapts some of the reflex gains. Using optimization of the model's 
control parameters, we found in simulation that this circuitry suffices to generate steady behaviours 
from walking, turning and running to slope and stair negotiation, as well as unsteady behaviours such 
as large speed transitions and obstacle avoidance. The results suggest that, for human locomotion 
behaviours, the muscle synergies located in the spinal cord are composed more of sensory feedback 
circuits than of circuits stimulating muscles in a fixed pattern.  
     The role of sensory feedback in the activation and organization of muscle synergies remains 
debated. The analysis of muscle activity patterns in frog swimming and jumping before and after 
deafferentiation suggests that these behaviours are generated largely by centrally organized, fixed 
balance synergies (Cheung et al., 2005; Bizzi and Cheung, 2013). For humans, on the other hand, 
experiments with spinal cord injured patients demonstrate that sensory feedback integration is 
essential to the generation of locomotion behaviours (Sinkjær et al., 2000; Dietz, 2002; Harkema, 
2008; Harkema et al., 2011). Our modelling results suggest how this sensory feedback integration 
may be organized in specific functional modules. 
     The proposed neural circuitry is not unique but plausible. The neurophysiological plausibility of 
some of the proposed reflex pathways is discussed in Geyer and Herr (2010). However, the human 
nervous system receives input from a vast sensory network, and the afferent pathways that we used to 
embed specific functions of legged locomotion can likely be replaced by alternative pathways 
transmitting similar information. Experimental methods which either can probe the proposed 
pathways or elicit characteristic mechanical or EMG responses (Sinkjær et al., 2000; Cronin et al., 
2009; Hof and Duysens, 2013) will be necessary to test the specific modules.  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   12 
 
 
     One such method probing the spinal reflex network is epidural stimulation. Continuous epidural 
stimulation of the lumbosacral cord has been shown to restore standing and assisted stepping in 
patients with spinal cord injury (Harkema et al., 2011; Angeli et al., 2014). These experiments and 
computational models of transcutaneous electrical stimulation of the lumbar spine (Holsheimer, 2002; 
Capogrosso et al., 2013) indicate that epidural stimulation alters the physiological state of the injured 
spinal cord, primarily exciting afferent fibres and their corresponding neural circuits. The method has 
also been applied in experiments with unimpaired human subjects to elicit monosynaptic reflexes and 
study their modulation during locomotion (Minassian et al., 2007; Courtine et al., 2007). Figure 8 
compares the resulting modulation of the responses during walking in a number of leg muscles 
studied with epidural stimulation by Courtine et al. (2007) to the modulations predicted by our model 
when subjected to simulated epidural stimulation experiments. Although for several muscles 
deviations occur in phases of the gait cycle (initial stance and late swing for VAS and GAS), the 
modulations show similar patterns overall, supporting the plausibility of the proposed neural circuitry 
in walking. Further comparisons will be required to probe if this similarity extends to other 
locomotion behaviours, or if alternative control models can predict a similar response to epidural 
stimulation. 
     Most of the alternative control models of human locomotion emphasize CPGs at the core of the 
spinal control circuitry (Taga et al., 1991; Taga, 1998; Ogihara and Yamazaki, 2001; Hase et al., 2003; 
Paul et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011). From a theoretical standpoint, CPGs provide the advantage of a 
feedforward drive at the cost of being sensitive to external disturbances when compared to feedback 
control (Kuo, 2002). The sensory feedback network, on the other hand, shows large robustness to 
external disturbances (Tab. 1 and Figs. 1&6) but depends on the interaction with the mechanical 
environment to drive forward. One way to combine the advantages of both approaches is to 
understand CPGs as observers of feedback control rather than sole generators of limb motion. Kuo 
(2002) has shown that such an interpretation can improve the performance for systems subject to 
unexpected disturbances and sensory noise. Motivated by this idea, Dzeladini et al. (2014) combined 
the previously developed reflex model for planar locomotion (Geyer and Herr, 2010) with morphing 
central pattern generators that can learn to predict the sensory output generated by the reflex model. 
They found that the combined model can regulate walking speed by changing only few CPG 
parameters, indicating how CPGs could function as an internal drive and speed control mechanism in 
a primarily reflex-based control network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   13 
 
 
 
Appendix A 
Musculoskeletal parameters 
The properties of the segments, muscles, and musculoskeletal attachments are defined based on 
physiological data (Chandler et al., 1975; Yamaguchi et al., 1990; Visser et al., 1990; Günther and 
Ruder, 2003; Arnold et al., 2010; Geyer and Herr, 2010; McCullough et al., 2011) and shown in tables 
2 to 4, respectively. The segment parameters include the dimension of the segment   , the distance of 
the joints    the segment is connected to, the position of the centre of mass   , the mass   , and the 
inertia around the principal axes   ,    and   . The values   ,    and    are defined either as height 
(h), length (l) or width (w) as measured from the distal part of the segment for the human model 
standing straight up. The individual muscle parameters reported in table 3 are the maximum isometric 
force     , the maximum contraction velocity     , the optimum fiber length     , and the tendon 
slack length       . The remaining muscle parameters common to all muscles are the same as in 
(Geyer and Herr, 2010). The moment arms of HAB, HAD, HFL, GLU, HAMhip, HAMknee, RFhip, and 
BFSH are assumed to be constant,     , leading to muscle length changes        (    ), 
where   accounts the pennation angle of the MTU and    is the reference joint angle when the MTU 
is at its rest length            . For RFknee, VAS, GASknee, GASankle, SOL, and TA variable moment 
arms          ( (      )) are assumed with corresponding muscle length changes    
 
     
 {   ( (      ))     ( (       ))}, where        (        ⁄ ) (         )⁄  
is a scaling factor defined by the maximum and minimum moment arms,      and     , at 
corresponding angles,      and     . The joint angles are defined so that positive angles indicate 
extension of the pitch joints and abduction of the roll joints. The zero angle configuration corresponds 
to a pose of the human model where all the foot contact points lie on the ground plane, the shank, 
thigh and trunk segments are parallel to the ground plane, and the ankle and hip point backwards 
while the knee and head point forward. For example, when standing upright, the ankle joints are at 90 
deg, the knee and hip pitch joints are at 180 deg, and the hip roll joints are at 0 deg. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   14 
 
 
Appendix B 
Reflex control equations 
Reflex pathways that are frequently used in the control network include force feedback (   
   
     ), 
length feedback (   
   
     ), velocity feedback (    
   
     ), proportional-derivative feedback (      
  
  
     ), 
and co-stimulation (   
     
     ). The general structure of these pathways is shown in Eq. 2, 
   
   
          
         (    )
  
   
          
     [       (    )          
     ]
 
      
 
   
          
     [       (    )  {      
 (    (    )        )}] 
   
   
          
     [        (    )] 
     
  
  
      [   
     { (    )      }    ̇
      ̇(    )]
 
  
     
          
           
     
[ ] 
     
          
     [               ] 
 (2) 
where the left superscript indicates the type of the pathway, the right superscript specifies the target 
muscle (   ) stimulated by the pathway and the control module ( ) the pathway belongs to. The right 
subscript shows the signal origin as either the source muscle (   ) or the trunk lean  . In addition, 
for the length and co-stimulation pathways a left subscript indicates feedback modulation by either the 
swing-leg target angle (       
 
   
     ) or the co-stimulation threshold (      
[ ] 
     
     ). With this notation 
system, the reflex pathways that generate the muscle stimulations are given below for each muscle 
individually: 
 
HAB 
         
   
      
         
  
   
      
         
    
      
            
 
 
   
      
 
HAD 
         
  
  
      
         
    
      
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   15 
 
             
 
 
   
      
 
HFL 
            
   
   
      
         
    
        
    
      
            
  
    
         
    
      
             
  
   
       
 
GLU 
         
   
      
            
   
  
      
         
    
        
   
      
             
  
 
     
         
     
      
where     
       
    
  
              
  
   
       
 
HAM 
         
   
      
         
     
      
         
     
      
             
  
 
   
      
 
RF 
        
   
     
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   16 
 
 
 
VAS 
         
   
      
          
    
      
          
   
       
 
BFSH 
          
    
       
           
  
       
          
    
           
 where    
 
   
 [      (     )  {     
 (    
 (     )       )}]  
 and    [  
     
         (     )  
 
   
       (     )]
 
 
                 
[ ] 
     
       
 
GAS 
         
   
      
                
[ ] 
     
      
 
SOL 
         
   
      
 
TA 
        
  
     
            
   
     
 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   17 
 
 
 
     The swing leg control trigger events (   ~   , in Fig. 3) are modelled as:  
            (    )  {       
 (    (  (      ))         )}, 
           (    )  {      
 (    
  (  (      ))        )}[    ], 
          (    )  {     
 (    
 (  (      ))       )}[    ],  
           (    )   [    ], 
where [    ] in    , for example, indicates that     gets triggered only if     is already triggered in 
the swing phase. 
 
References 
Ackermann M & van den Bogert AJ (2010). Optimality principles for model-based prediction of human gait. J Biomech 43, 
1055–1060. 
Angeli CA, Edgerton VR, Gerasimenko YP & Harkema SJ (2014). Altering spinal cord excitability enables voluntary 
movements after chronic complete paralysis in humans. Brain 137, 1394–1409. 
Arnold EM, Ward SR, Lieber RL & Delp SL (2010). A model of the lower limb for analysis of human movement. Ann 
Biomed Eng 38, 269–279. 
Bizzi E, Cheung V, d’Avella A, Saltiel P & Tresch M (2008). Combining modules for movement. Brain Res Rev 57, 125–
133. 
Bizzi E & Cheung VC (2013). The neural origin of muscle synergies. Front Comput Neurosci 7: 51. 
Brown TG (1911). The intrinsic factors in the act of progression in the mammal. P Roy Soc Lond B-Conta 84, 308–319. 
Capogrosso M, Wenger N, Raspopovic S, Musienko P, Beauparlant J, Luciani LB, Courtine G & Micera S (2013). A 
computational model for epidural electrical stimulation of spinal sensorimotor circuits. J Neurosci 33, 19326–19340. 
Chandler R, Clauser C, McConville J, Reynolds H & Young J (1975). Investigation of inertial properties of the human body 
Technical report, DTIC Document. 
Cheung VC, d’Avella A, Tresch MC & Bizzi E (2005). Central and sensory contributions to the activation and organization 
of muscle synergies during natural motor behaviors. J Neurosci 25, 6419–6434. 
Courtine G, Harkema SJ, Dy CJ, Gerasimenko YP & Dyhre-Poulsen P (2007). Modulation of multisegmental monosynaptic 
responses in a variety of leg muscles during walking and running in humans. J Physiol 582, 1125–1139. 
Cronin NJ, Ishikawa M, Grey MJ, Af Klint R, Komi PV, Avela J, Sinkjaer T & Voigt M (2009). Mechanical and neural 
stretch responses of the human soleus muscle at different walking speeds. J Physiol 587, 3375–3382. 
Damavandi M, Dixon PC & Pearsall DJ (2012). Ground reaction force adaptations during cross-slope walking and running. 
Hum Movement Sci 31, 182–189. 
Desai R & Geyer H (2012). Robust swing leg placement under large disturbances. IEEE Int Conf Rob Biomim, pp. 265–270. 
IEEE. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   18 
 
Desai R & Geyer H (2013). Muscle-reflex control of robust swing leg placement. IEEE Int Conf Rob Aut, pp. 2169–2174. 
IEEE. 
Dietz V (2002). Proprioception and locomotor disorders. Nat Rev Neurosci 3, 781–790. 
Dominici N, Ivanenko YP, Cappellini G, dAvella A, Mond` ı V, Cicchese M, Fabiano A, Silei T, Di Paolo A, Giannini C et 
al. (2011). Locomotor primitives in newborn babies and their development. Science 334, 997–999. 
Dzeladini F, van den Kieboom J & Ijspeert A (2014). The contribution of a central pattern generator in a reflex-based 
neuromuscular model. Front Hum Neurosci 8:371. 
Eng JJ & Winter DA (1995). Kinetic analysis of the lower limbs during walking: what information can be gained from a 
three-dimensional model? J Biomech 28, 753–758. 
Ferris DP, Louie M & Farley CT (1998). Running in the real world: adjusting leg stiffness for different surfaces. P Roy Soc 
Lond B Bio 265, 989–994. 
Gerasimenko Y, Roy RR & Edgerton VR (2008). Epidural stimulation: comparison of the spinal circuits that generate and 
control locomotion in rats, cats and humans. Exp Neurol 209, 417–425. 
Geyer H & Herr H (2010). A muscle-reflex model that encodes principles of legged mechanics produces human walking 
dynamics and muscle activities. IEEE T Neur Sys Reh 18, 263–273. 
Grey MJ, Ladouceur M, Andersen JB, Nielsen JB & Sinkjær T (2001). Group ii muscle afferents probably contribute to the 
medium latency soleus stretch reflex during walking in humans. J Physiol 534, 925–933. 
Grillner S & Zangger P (1979). On the central generation of locomotion in the low spinal cat. Exp Brain Res 34, 241–261. 
Grillner S (2006). Biological pattern generation: the cellular and computational logic of networks in motion. Neuron 52, 
751–766. 
Guertin PA (2009). The mammalian central pattern generator for locomotion. Brain Res Rev 62, 45–56. 
Günther M & Ruder H (2003). Synthesis of two-dimensional human walking: a test of the λ-model. Biol Cybern 89, 89–106. 
Hansen N (2006). The cma evolution strategy: A comparing review. Towards a New Evolutionary Computation, pp. 75–102. 
Springer. 
Harkema S, Gerasimenko Y, Hodes J, Burdick J, Angeli C, Chen Y, Ferreira C, Willhite A, Rejc E, Grossman RG et al. 
(2011). Effect of epidural stimulation of the lumbosacral spinal cord on voluntary movement, standing, and assisted 
stepping after motor complete paraplegia: a case study. Lancet 377, 1938–1947. 
Harkema SJ (2008). Plasticity of interneuronal networks of the functionally isolated human spinal cord. Brain Res Rev 57, 
255–264. 
Hase K, Miyashita K, Ok S & Arakawa Y (2003). Human gait simulation with a neuromusculoskeletal model and 
evolutionary computation. J Visual Comp Animat 14, 73–92. 
Hof A & Duysens J (2013). Responses of human hip abductor muscles to lateral balance perturbations during walking. Exp 
Brain Res 230, 301–310. 
Holsheimer J (2002). Which neuronal elements are activated directly by spinal cord stimulation. Neuromodulation 5, 25–31. 
Ijspeert AJ (2008). Central pattern generators for locomotion control in animals and robots: a review. Neural Networks 21, 
642–653. 
Ivanenko YP, Poppele RE & Lacquaniti F (2004). Five basic muscle activation patterns account for muscle activity during 
human locomotion. J Physiol 556, 267–282. 
Kajita S, Kanehiro F, Kaneko K, Yokoi K & Hirukawa H (2001). The 3d linear inverted pendulum mode: A simple 
modeling for a biped walking pattern generation. IEEE/RSJ Int Conf Intel Rob Syst, Vol. 1, pp. 239–246. IEEE. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   19 
 
Kim Y, Tagawa Y, Obinata G & Hase K (2011). Robust control of cpg-based 3d neuromusculoskeletal walking model. Biol 
Cybern 105, 269–282. 
Knikou M & Rymer WZ (2002). Effects of changes in hip joint angle on h-reflex excitability in humans. Exp Brain Res 143, 
149–159. 
Kuo AD (2002). The relative roles of feedforward and feedback in the control of rhythmic movements. Motor Control 6, 
129–145. 
Kutch JJ & Valero-Cuevas FJ (2012). Challenges and new approaches to proving the existence of muscle synergies of neural 
origin. PLoS Comput Biol 8, e1002434. 
Lipfert SW, Günther M, Renjewski D, Grimmer S & Seyfarth A (2012). A model-experiment comparison of system 
dynamics for human walking and running. J Theor Biol 292, 11–17. 
Matsuoka K (1985). Sustained oscillations generated by mutually inhibiting neurons with adaptation. Biol Cybern 52, 367–
376. 
McCullough MB, Ringleb SI, Arai K, Kitaoka HB & Kaufman KR (2011). Moment arms of the ankle throughout the range 
of motion in three planes. Foot Ankle Int 32, 300–306. 
Meunier S, Penicaud A, Pierrot-Deseilligny E & Rossi A (1990). Monosynaptic ia excitation and recurrent inhibition from 
quadriceps to ankle flexors and extensors in man. J Physiol 423, 661–675. 
Minassian K, Persy I, Rattay F, Pinter MM, Kern H & Dimitrijevic MR (2007). Human lumbar cord circuitries can be 
activated by extrinsic tonic input to generate locomotor-like activity. Hum Movement Sci 26, 275–295. 
Mochon S & McMahon TA (1980). Ballistic walking. J Biomech 13, 49–57. 
Murray M, Mollinger L, Gardner G & Sepic S (1984). Kinematic and emg patterns during slow, free, and fast walking. J 
Orthop Res 2, 272–280. 
Ogihara N & Yamazaki N (2001). Generation of human bipedal locomotion by a bio-mimetic neuro-musculo-skeletal model. 
Biol Cybern 84, 1–11. 
Orlovsky GN, Deliagina T, Grillner S, Orlovskii G & Grillner S (1999). Neuronal control of locomotion: from mollusc to 
man. Oxford University Press. 
Paul C, Bellotti M, Jezernik S & Curt A (2005). Development of a human neuro-musculo-skeletal model for investigation of 
spinal cord injury. Biol Cybern 93, 153–170. 
Perry J & Burnfield JM (2010). Gait analysis: normal and pathological function. SLACK Incorporated, 2nd edition. 
Raibert M (1986). Legged robots that balance. MIT press. 
Rose J, Gamble JG & Adams JM (2006). Human walking. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 
Rossignol S, Barrière G, Frigon A, Barthélemy D, Bouyer L, Provencher J, Leblond H & Bernard G (2008). Plasticity of 
locomotor sensorimotor interactions after peripheral and/or spinal lesions. Brain Res Rev 57, 228–240. 
Seyfarth A, Günther M & Blickhan R (2001). Stable operation of an elastic three-segment leg. Biol Cybern 84, 365–382. 
Sinkjær T, Andersen JB, Ladouceur M, Christensen LO & Nielsen JB (2000). Major role for sensory feedback in soleus emg 
activity in the stance phase of walking in man. J Physiol 523, 817–827. 
Song S, Desai R & Geyer H (2013). Integration of an adaptive swing control into a neuromuscular human walking model. 
IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, pp. 4915–4918. IEEE. 
Song S & Geyer H (2012). Regulating speed and generating large speed transitions in a neuromuscular human walking 
model. IEEE Int Conf Rob Aut, pp. 511–516. IEEE. 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   20 
 
Song S & Geyer H (2013). Generalization of a muscle-reflex control model to 3d walking. IEEE Int Conf Eng Med Biol Soc, 
pp. 7463–7466. IEEE. 
Stokes V, Andersson C & Forssberg H (1989). Rotational and translational movement features of the pelvis and thorax 
during adult human locomotion. J Biomech 22, 43–50. 
Taga G (1998). A model of the neuro-musculo-skeletal system for anticipatory adjustment of human locomotion during 
obstacle avoidance. Biol Cybern 78, 9–17. 
Taga G, Yamaguchi Y & Shimizu H (1991). Self-organized control of bipedal locomotion by neural oscillators in 
unpredictable environment. Biol Cybern 65, 147–159. 
Torres-Oviedo G & Ting LH (2007). Muscle synergies characterizing human postural responses. J Neurophysiol 98, 2144–
2156. 
Tresch MC & Jarc A (2009). The case for and against muscle synergies. Curr Opin Neurobiol 19, 601–607. 
Tresch MC, Saltiel P & Bizzi E (1999). The construction of movement by the spinal cord. Nat Neurosci 2, 162–167. 
Umberger BR, Gerritsen KG & Martin PE (2003). A model of human muscle energy expenditure. Comput Method Biomec 6, 
99–111. 
Umberger BR (2010). Stance and swing phase costs in human walking. J Roy Soc Interface 7:50, 1329–1340. 
Visser J, Hoogkamer J, Bobbert M & Huijing P (1990). Length and moment arm of human leg muscles as a function of knee 
and hip-joint angles. Eur J Appl Physiol O 61, 453–460. 
Wren TA, Patrick Do K, Rethlefsen SA & Healy B (2006). Cross-correlation as a method for comparing dynamic 
electromyography signals during gait. J Biomech 39, 2714–2718. 
Wu A & Geyer H (2013). The 3-D Spring-Mass Model Reveals a Time-Based Deadbeat Control for Highly Robust Running 
and Steering in Uncertain Environments. IEEE T Robot 29, 1114–1124. 
Yamaguchi G, Sawa A, Moran D, Fessler M & Winters J (1990). A survey of human musculotendon actuator parameters. 
Multiple muscle systems, pp. 717–773. Springer-Verlag. 
Yin K, Loken K & van de Panne M (2007). Simbicon: Simple biped locomotion control. ACM T Graphic, Vol. 26, p. 105. 
ACM. 
 
Additional Information 
Competing interests 
None declared. 
Author contributions 
All authors designed the research, drafted the article, and approved the final version of the manuscript. 
S.S. implemented the computational model and conducted the simulation studies. 
Funding 
This work was supported in part by the NSF through the NSF ERC on Quality of Life Technology 
(EEC 0540865) and by NIH through the NICHD National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research 
(1R01HD075492). 
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   21 
 
Table 1. Ground tolerance and push resistance for the neuromuscular controller trained on one 
 10cm-terrain. Shown are the survival rate on 20 randomly generated test terrains of different 
maximum step size (top) and the largest impulse (variable force, fixed time interval of 200ms) that 
can be applied to the pelvis in different directions and times of the gait cycle (bottom). 
ground tolerance       
roughness (cm)  0  2  4  6  8  10 
survival rate (%) 100 90 80 55 15 0 
       
push resistance       
time (% gait cycle) 0 10 20 30 40  
forward (N s) 54 32 52 54 72  
backward 50 36 54 86 82  
medial 26 12 10 24 18  
lateral 12 8 10 32 50  
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   22 
 
Table 2. Segment parameters. 
 trunk thigh shank foot 
   (cm) 80(h) 46(h) 46(h) 20(l) 8(h) 
   (cm) 20(w) 46(h) 46(h) 16(l) 8(h) 
   (cm) 35(h) 28(h) 28(h) 14(l) 7(h) 
   (kg) 53.5 8.5 3.5 1.25 
   (kg m2) 4.0 0.15 0.05 0.0007 
   (kg m2) 2.5 0.15 0.05 0.005 
   (kg m2) 1.0 0.03 0.003 0.005 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   23 
 
Table 3. Muscle parameters. 
 HAB HAD HFL GLU HAM RF VAS BFSH GAS SOL TA 
     (kN) 3 4.5 2 1.5 3 1.2 6 0.35 1.5 4 0.8 
     (lopt s-1) 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 6 12 
     (cm) 9 10 11 11 10 8 8 12 5 4 6 
       (cm) 7 18 10 13 31 35 23 10 40 26 24 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   24 
 
Table 4. Musculoskeletal attachment parameters. 
 hip knee ankle 
 HAB HAD HFL GLU HAM RF HAM RF VAS BFSH GAS GAS SOL TA 
   (cm) 6 3 8 8 8 8 5 - - 4 - - - - 
     
(cm) - - - - - - - 6 6 - 5 6 6 4 
     
(cm) - - - - - - - 4 4 - 2 2 2 1 
     
(deg) - - - - - - - 165 165 - 140 100 100 80 
     
(deg) - - - - - - - 45 45 - 45 180 180 180 
   (deg) 10 15 160 120 150 170 180 125 120 160 165 80 90 110 
  0.7 1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.5 0.7 
 
 
  
 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   25 
 
Figure 1. 3D neuromuscular human model walking over rough ground with height changes up to  10 
cm (snapshots every 600 ms). The model consists of seven segments connected by eight revolute 
joints and actuated by 11 muscles per leg.  A. Nine muscles actuate the sagittal plane joints at the hip, 
knee and ankle.  B. The hip is further actuated in the lateral plane by two muscles.  C. Each foot has 
four contact points generating continuous ground interaction forces when engaged.  D. The neural 
circuitry of the spinal cord (SC) controlling the muscles is organized into ten functional modules that 
are subject to long (  ), medium (  ), and short transmission delays (  ). The communication between 
the spinal cord and the supraspinal system (SS) adjusting the foot placement is equally delayed (   ). 
 
  

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   26 
 
Figure 2. Neural control organization.  A. The control is organized in spinal and supraspinal layers. 
The spinal layer consists of ten reflex modules       for each leg which are active in stance or swing. 
The supraspinal layer adjusts the desired foot placements (    ) and the desired minimum swing leg 
length (    ), and selects which leg should transition into swing control during double support.  B. 
Desired foot placement is calculated as target leg angles     
  and     
  for sagittal (s) and frontal (f) 
plane motions based on the velocity      of the COM and its distance to the stance leg ankle,     .  C. 
In double support, swing control is initiated for the leg whose angle   is farther from the target. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   27 
 
Figure 3. Reflex modules of the spinal control layer.  A. Ten reflex modules realize with decentralized 
feedback key functions of legged systems including compliant behaviour and trunk balance in stance 
(    ) and ground clearance and leg placement in swing (     ).  B. Schematic contribution of the 
modules to each muscle's stimulation throughout the gait cycle. The dotted portions indicate modules 
that are inhibited or excited during double support in proportion to the load    on the contralateral leg 
when transitioning from stance control to swing control.      : trigger events within swing control 
(compare text for details). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   28 
 
Figure 4. Kinematics and dynamics for walking at 1.2 m s-1 in humans (grey traces) and the 3D 
neuromuscular model (black traces) over a normalized gait cycle. Stance lasts from 0% to about 60%. 
The panels show (A) the roll, pitch and yaw of the trunk with respect to the world frame (compare Fig. 
1), (B) the leg joint angles and torques, and (C) the ground reaction forces in fore-aft (x), medio-
lateral (y), and vertical directions (z). The grey areas (i-iv) highlight key differences between model 
and human data. Human data adapted from Rose et al. (2006) (angles), Eng and Winter (1995) 
(torques), and Damavandi et al. (2012) (GRFs). R: cross correlation values (Wren et al., 2006). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   29 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of muscle activations in normal walking.  A. Human muscle activations for the 
eleven muscle groups of the model estimated from low-pass filtered surface electromyograms 
(adapted from Perry and Burnfield, 2010).  B. Model-predicted muscle activations with coefficients of 
correlation (R) between model and human data.  C. Contributions of individual control modules    to 
the activation of selected muscles (  : prestimulation contribution). Net activation in (B) is the sum of 
the contributions and saturated within 0% and 100%. Shaded backgrounds indicate stance phase with 
double supports in a darker hue. Compared muscles: (i) gluteus medius, (ii) adductor magnus, (iii) 
adductor longus, (iv) gluteus maximus, (v) semimembranosus, (vi) vastus lateralis. R: cross 
correlation value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   30 
 
Figure 6. Peak contributions of spinal modules to individual muscle activations in steady (grey) and 
disturbed walking (black). Control modules with peak increases of more than 20% are indicated in the 
grid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   31 
 
Figure 7. Behaviour diversity. Snapshots of the human neuromuscular model during steady (A) and 
transitional behaviours (B) are shown. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.   32 
 
Figure 8. Muscle responses to epidural stimulation in walking. Model-predicted responses to epidural 
stimulation (black traces) are compared to human experimental data (grey traces) adapted from 
Courtine et al. (2007). In humans, changes in muscle EMG are observed for several leg muscles when 
electrical stimulation is applied transcutaneously to the lumbar spine. The peak-to-peak amplitude of 
these changes varies with the phase of the gait cycle in which the epidural stimulation is applied 
(divided into 16 phases, marked in open circles, no responses reported for the hip muscles). In the 
simulation, epidural stimulation is mimicked as 20ms square-wave impulses simultaneously applied 
to all afferent pathways at the beginning of each phase of the gait cycle. The resulting peak-to-peak 
amplitude change in the muscle activations is shown. 
 
