== D3TVUUJP [?, Pratt, ? 1987-01-01] ==
The activity of selected single alpha-motoneurons, Renshaw cells (RCs), and Ia inhibitory interneurons (IaINs) during fictive locomotion was recorded via microelectrodes in decerebrate (precollicular-postmammillary) cats in which fictive locomotion was induced by stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region. The interrelationships in the timing and frequency of discharge among these three interconnected cell types were determined by comparing their averaged step cycle firing histograms, which were normalized in reference to motoneuron activity recorded in ventral root filaments. Previous findings that RCs are rhythmically active during locomotion and discharge in phase with the motoneur

== RYXH6JSP [?, McCrea, ? 1980-09-01] ==
Renshaw cell activity and recurrent effects on motoneurons during fictive locomotion.D A McCrea, C A Pratt, and L M JordanD A McCrea, C A Pratt, and L M JordanPublished Online:01 Sep 1980https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1980.44.3.475MoreSectionsPDF (2 MB)Download PDF ToolsExport citationAdd to favoritesGet permissionsTrack citations ShareShare onFacebookTwitterLinkedInWeChat Previous Back to Top Next Download PDF FiguresReferencesRelatedInformation Cited ByRecurrent inhibition is higher in eccentric compared to isometric and concentric maximal voluntary contractions30 March 2018 | Acta Physiologica, Vol. 223, No. 4Spinal Control of Locomotion: Individual Neurons, Their Circuits and Functions25 Jun

== F2FNGYXP [?, ?, Gossard 1994-01-01] ==
It has been previously shown that phasic stimulation of group I afferents from ankle and knee extensor muscles may entrain and/or reset the intrinsic locomotor rhythm; these afferents are thus acting on motoneurones through the spinal rhythm generators. It was also concluded that the major part of these effects originates from Golgi tendon organ Ib afferents. Transmission in this pathway to lumbar motoneurones has now been investigated during fictive locomotion in spinal cats injected with nialamide and l-DOPA, and in decerebrate cats with stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region. In spinal cats injected with nialamide and l-DOPA, it was possible to evoke long-latency, long-lasting 

== YANK2JE7 [?, Domínguez-Rodríguez, ? 2020] ==
Abstract   Sensory information arising from limb movements controls the spinal locomotor circuitry to adapt the motor pattern to demands of the environment. Stimulation of extensor group (gr) I afferents during fictive locomotion in decerebrate cats prolongs the ongoing extension, and terminates ongoing flexion with an initiation of the subsequent extension, i. e. “resetting to extension”. Moreover, instead of the classical Ib non-reciprocal inhibition, stimulation of extensor gr I afferents produces a polysynaptic excitation in extensor motoneurons with latencies (∼3.5 – 4.0 ms) compatible with 3 interposed interneurons. We assume that some interneurons in this pathway actually belong to th

== X7KBR5U9 [?, Conway, ? 1987-01-01] ==
The reflex regulation of stepping is an important factor in adapting the step cycle to changes in the environment. The present experiments have examined the influence of muscle proprioceptors on centrally generated rhythmic locomotor activity in decerebrate unanesthetized cats with a spinal transection at Th12. Fictive locomotion, recorded as alternating activity in hindlimb flexor and extensor nerves, was induced by administration of nialamide (a monoamine oxidase inhibitor) and L-DOPA. Brief electrical stimulation of group I afferents from knee and ankle extensors were effective in resetting fictive locomotion in a coordinated fashion. An extensor group I volley delivered during a flexor b

== 9GTNRHKK [?, Perreault, ? 1999-12-15] ==
At rest, extensor group I afferents produce oligosynaptic inhibition of extensor motoneurons. During locomotor activity, however, such inhibition is replaced by oligosynaptic excitation. Oligosynaptic excitation from extensor group I afferents plays a crucial role in the regulation of extensor activity during walking. In this study we investigate the possibility that this mechanism also regulates extensor muscle activity during other motor tasks. We show that the reflex pathways responsible for extensor group I oligosynaptic excitation during fictive locomotion can be activated during both fictive scratching and fictive weight support (tonic motor activity induced by contralateral scratching

== 77QUIHAM [?, Noga, ? 1987-03-01] ==
The contribution of Renshaw cell (RC) activity to the production of fictive locomotion in the mesencephalic preparation was examined using the nicotinic antagonist mecamylamine (MEC). After the i.v. administration of 3 doses of MEC (1.0 mg/kg) the following observations were made: 1) ventral root (VR) evoked discharge of RCs was decreased by up to 87.7%, 2) recurrent inhibitory postsynaptic potentials recorded in alpha motoneurons were greatly reduced or abolished, and 3) the rhythmic firing of RCs during the fictive step cycle was abolished in 83% of the cells examined. Locomotor drive potentials (LDPs) in motoneurons persisted during the fictive step cycle after MEC administration. Bursts 

