...t signals acting at the PF or motoneuron level cannot reset the rhythm and can only produce non-resetting deletions. B, Organization of interactions at the lower, motoneuron level, including flexor and extensor motoneurons (Mn), Ia interneurons, and Renshaw cells (R). C, Organization of bilateral left–right interactions in the spinal cord mediated by inhibitory and excitatory CINs. E, Extensor; F, flexor; l, left; r, right. Review 3 of 20 September/October 2015, 2(5) e0069-15.2015 eNeuro.sfn.org of particular motoneurons, Renshaw cells, and interneu- rons involved in nonreciprocal and reciproc...

...zation of bilateral left–right interactions in the spinal cord mediated by inhibitory and excitatory CINs. E, Extensor; F, flexor; l, left; r, right. Review 3 of 20 September/October 2015, 2(5) e0069-15.2015 eNeuro.sfn.org of particular motoneurons, Renshaw cells, and interneu- rons involved in nonreciprocal and reciprocal antagonist interactions and processing of afferent feedback (Ia, Ib, and other types; Fig. 1B). In the framework of a multilevel CPG, any spontaneous perturbation or an afferent or supraspinal signal affecting spinal circuitry below the RG level (i.e., at the PF or motoneuro...

...En1, are a heterogeneous group of inhibitory, ipsilaterally projecting interneurons (Fig. 2 ). Different subtypes of these neurons are involved in different inhibitory functions in the spinal cord, such as reciprocal (Ia interneurons) and recurrent (Renshaw cells) inhibition. A subpopulation of these neurons was found necessary for generating fast locomotor activity and, hence, can play a role in regulating the locomotor speed (Gosgnach et al., 2006 ; Zhang et al., 2014 ). These neu- rons, along with V2b neurons (see below), are involved in securing flexor– extensor alternation in the spinal c...

...ion are unable to move their limb joints and display marked deficits in limb-driven reflex movements. Note that the population of V1 interneurons is com- posed of multiple functionally different cell types, includ- ing Ia inhibitory interneurons and Renshaw cells mediating different forms of inhibition at the level of mo- toneurons ( Goulding, 2009 ). Here, we use the term “V1 neurons” only for the subpopulation of V1 neurons that are potentially involved in flexor– extensor and left–right interactions at the CPG (not motoneuron) level (i.e., for V1 cells not representing Ia or Renshaw cells)....

... Goulding, 2009 ). Here, we use the term “V1 neurons” only for the subpopulation of V1 neurons that are potentially involved in flexor– extensor and left–right interactions at the CPG (not motoneuron) level (i.e., for V1 cells not representing Ia or Renshaw cells). The recent study by Zhang et al. (2014) has shown that, although both V1 and V2b interneurons are involved in flexor– extensor alternation, their functional roles are dif- ferent, and their selective removal from the intact cord and isolated hemicord produces different effects on loco- motor pattern. The major findings of the study ...

