Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  1 of 21
Operation of spinal sensorimotor circuits 
controlling phase durations during tied- 
belt and split- belt locomotion after a 
lateral thoracic hemisection
Ilya A Rybak1*, Natalia A Shevtsova1, Johannie Audet2, Sirine Yassine2, 
Sergey N Markin1, Boris I Prilutsky3, Alain Frigon2*
1Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, College of Medicine, Drexel University, 
Philadelphia, United States; 2Department of Pharmacology- Physiology, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Centre de Recherche du CHUS, Université de 
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Canada; 3School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, United States
eLife Assessment
This important modeling study alters a previous model of the intact cat spinal locomotor network 
to simulate a lateral hemi- section of the spinal cord. The modeling and experimental work described 
provide convincing evidence that this model is capable of qualitatively predicting alterations to the 
swing and stance phase durations during locomotion at different speeds on intact or split- belt tread-
mills. This paperarticle will interest neuroscientists studying vertebrate motor systems, including 
researchers working on motor dysfunction after spinal cord injury.
Abstract Locomotion is controlled by spinal circuits that interact with supraspinal drives and 
sensory feedback from the limbs. These sensorimotor interactions are disrupted following spinal 
cord injury. The thoracic lateral hemisection represents an experimental model of an incomplete 
spinal cord injury, where connections between the brain and spinal cord are abolished on one side 
of the cord. To investigate the effects of such an injury on the operation of the spinal locomotor 
network, we used our computational model of cat locomotion recently published in eLife (Rybak 
et al., 2024) to investigate and predict changes in cycle and phase durations following a thoracic 
lateral hemisection during treadmill locomotion in tied- belt (equal left- right speeds) and split- belt 
(unequal left- right speeds) conditions. In our simulations, the ‘hemisection’ was always applied 
to the right side. Based on our model, we hypothesized that following hemisection the contrale-
sional (‘intact’, left) side of the spinal network is mostly controlled by supraspinal drives, whereas 
the ipsilesional (‘hemisected’, right) side is mostly controlled by somatosensory feedback. We 
then compared the simulated results with those obtained during experiments in adult cats before 
and after a mid- thoracic lateral hemisection on the right side in the same locomotor conditions. 
Our experimental results confirmed many effects of hemisection on cat locomotion predicted 
by our simulations. We show that having the ipsilesional hindlimb step on the slow belt, but not 
the fast belt, during split- belt locomotion substantially reduces the effects of lateral hemisection. 
The model provides explanations for changes in temporal characteristics of hindlimb locomotion 
following hemisection based on altered interactions between spinal circuits, supraspinal drives, and 
somatosensory feedback.
RESEARCH ADVANCE
*For correspondence: 
iar22@drexel.edu (IAR); 
Alain.Frigon@USherbrooke.ca 
(AF)
Competing interest: The authors 
declare that no competing 
interests exist.
Funding: See page 17
Preprint posted
14 September 2024
Sent for Review
07 October 2024
Reviewed preprint posted
09 December 2024
Reviewed preprint revised
14 January 2025
Version of Record published
27 January 2025
Reviewing Editor: Jeffrey C 
Smith, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, United States
   Copyright Rybak et al. This 
article is distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use and 
redistribution provided that the 
original author and source are 
credited.
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  2 of 21
Introduction
The basic control of flexor and extensor activities during locomotion is performed by circuits located 
in the spinal cord, including those of the central pattern generator, that receive inputs from the brain 
and sensory feedback from peripheral receptors (Grillner, 1981; Rossignol et al., 2006; Kiehn, 2006; 
Frigon, 2017; Frigon et  al., 2021). It has been hypothesized that somatosensory feedback plays 
a major role in the control of locomotion at lower speeds, and that this role decreases as speed 
increases (Full and Koditschek, 1999; Holmes et al., 2006; Ijspeert and Daley, 2023). Consequently, 
different forms of spinal cord injuries (SCIs) may affect spinal circuits and/or their speed- dependent 
control by supraspinal and somatosensory mechanisms, hence changing the locomotor pattern and 
related flexor and extensor activities. In humans, most SCIs are not complete and some pathways 
that communicate between the brain and spinal cord remain intact (Harkema et al., 2011; Angeli 
et al., 2014). A frequently used experimental model of incomplete SCI in animal models is a lateral 
hemisection, performed by surgically sectioning half the spinal cord in the transverse plane. A lateral 
hemisection, which reproduces features of the Brown- Séquard syndrome observed in humans, abol-
ishes all spinal pathways on one side of the cord (Shams et al., 2024). This effectively cuts off bidi-
rectional communication between the brain and spinal cord on one side. Several studies have shown 
how the locomotor pattern adjusts following a lateral hemisection at thoracic levels, mainly in rats 
and cats (Kato et al., 1984; Helgren and Goldberger, 1993; Webb and Muir, 2002; Barrière et al., 
2008; Frigon et al., 2009; Barrière et al., 2010; Filli et al., 2011; Doperalski et al., 2011; Martinez 
et al., 2011; Martinez et al., 2012; Martinez et al., 2013; Thibaudier et al., 2017; Lecomte et al., 
2022; Audet et al., 2023). The main feature is that the locomotor pattern becomes asymmetric with 
different stance and swing phase durations for the contralesional and ipsilesional hindlimbs. However, 
changes in sensorimotor interactions following a lateral hemisection and other incomplete SCIs, as 
well as their impact on the control of phase durations/transitions, remain poorly understood.
Using experimental data obtained during treadmill locomotion from intact cats and cats with a 
complete thoracic SCI (i.e. ,spinal transection), we previously built a computational model of the 
neural control of cat hindlimb locomotion (Rybak et al., 2024). We used this model to investigate 
how supraspinal inputs and somatosensory feedback interact with spinal circuits to control phase 
durations over a range of speeds during tied- belt (equal left- right speeds) and split- belt (unequal left- 
right speeds) treadmill locomotion. Based on that study, we proposed that spinal circuits can operate 
in different regimes depending on the speed of locomotion and available inputs from supraspinal 
structures and somatosensory feedback. Specifically, in the intact condition, spinal circuits operated in 
a state- machine regime (an external signal is necessary for the extension- to- flexion transitions) at slow 
speeds before transitioning to a flexor- driven regime (locomotor activity is defined by the intrinsic 
oscillations of the flexor half- center) and then to a classical half- center regime (the oscillations require 
mutual inhibition of both half- centers) at higher speeds. The relative contributions from supraspinal 
drive and somatosensory feedback to the control of flexor and extensor phase durations changed 
depending on speed and the spinal network’s operating regime. In spinal- transected cats, however, 
spinal circuits operated exclusively in a state- machine regime, requiring sensory feedback from the 
limbs to regulate flexor and extensor phase durations across speeds.
In the present study, we used the above computational model to simulate the effects of a thoracic 
lateral hemisection and predict speed- dependent changes in cycle and phase durations during tied- 
belt and split- belt locomotion after hemisection. We hypothesized that following hemisection the 
contralesional (‘intact’) side is mostly controlled by supraspinal drives, whereas the ipsilesional (‘hemi-
sected’) side is mostly controlled by somatosensory feedback. We then collected data in adult cats 
before and after a mid- thoracic lateral hemisection in the same locomotor conditions and compared 
experimental results with modeling predictions. The simulated and experimental results concerning 
the cycle, swing, and stance durations during tied- belt and split- belt treadmill locomotion across 
speeds were qualitatively similar. The present findings extend the current understanding of the oper-
ation of the spinal locomotor network and the specific roles of supraspinal and somatosensory inputs 
in the control of this network before and after SCI.
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  3 of 21
Results
Modeling the effects of thoracic lateral hemisection on cycle and phase 
durations during tied-belt and split-belt locomotion
Model description
In the present study, we used our computational model of the neural control of locomotion described 
in detail in our eLife paper (Rybak et al., 2024). The schematic of the intact model with the spinal cord 
circuits, supraspinal drives, and somatosensory feedback is shown in Figure 1A. The model describes 
neuronal circuits involved in the control of, and interactions between, the cat hindlimbs during tread-
mill locomotion. Briefly, the spinal circuitry in the model includes two rhythm generators (RGs), each 
consisting of two conditional bursters, representing flexor (F) and extensor (E) half- centers, respec-
tively, inhibiting each other through inhibitory neurons, InF and InE. The left and right RGs interact 
via a series of commissural interneuronal (CIN) pathways mediated by different sets of genetically 
identified commissural (V0 D, V0 V, and V3) and ipsilaterally projecting (V2a) interneurons and some 
hypothetical inhibitory interneurons (Ini). The organization of these interactions was directly drawn 
from our earlier models (Rybak et al., 2015; Shevtsova et al., 2015; Danner et al., 2017; Danner 
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022; Shevtsova et al., 2022) and was based on the results of previous 
molecular/genetic studies in mice or proposed to explain and reproduce different aspects of the 
neural control of locomotion in these studies.
As described in detail in our previous paper (Rybak et al., 2024), each RG can operate in one of 
three regimes: state- machine, flexor- driven, and classical half- center regimes. Specifically, the non- 
oscillatory state- machine regime requires an external input (e.g., feedback signal) to switch from 
extension to flexion. In the flexion- driven regime, the RG oscillations are defined by intrinsic bursting 
properties of the F half- center, whereas in the classical half- center regime both half- centers and their 
mutual inhibition are critically involved in RG oscillations.
The left and right RGs receive, correspondingly, left (  αL  , γL ) and right (  αR ,  γR ) ‘supraspinal’ drives 
and left (l- SF- E1, l- SF- E2) and right (r- SF- E1, r- SF- E2) sensory feedback from the hindlimbs. The 
SF- E1 feedback represents sensory feedback from spindle afferents of hip flexor muscles, whose 
activity increases when these muscles are stretched when the hip extends during stance (Grillner 
and Rossignol, 1978; Kriellaars et al., 1994; Pearson, 2004; Pearson, 2008; Klishko et al., 2021; 
Frigon et al., 2021). This feedback promotes the extensor- flexor phase transition via excitatory input 
to the ipsilateral F half- center and inhibitory input to the contralateral F half- center and increases 
with increasing treadmill speed. The SF- E2 feedback simulates in a simplified form the involvement of 
force- dependent group Ib afferent excitatory feedback from limb extensor muscles to the ipsilateral 
E half- center, reinforcing extensor activity and weight support during stance (Duysens and Pearson, 
1980; Pearson and Collins, 1993; Gossard et al., 1994; Frigon et al., 2021).
The supraspinal drives ( αL  and  αR ) presynaptically inhibit inputs from all ipsilateral somatosensory 
feedback types (see Figure 1A), hence reducing their influence on the operation of RGs. As a result, 
in the intact model at relatively high drives ( αL and αR  ≥ 0.35), the locomotor pattern is mostly defined 
by supraspinal drives and only slightly adjusted by somatosensory feedback. The influence of feed-
back on cycle and phase durations is reduced by presynaptic inhibition, securing the RGs’ operation 
in the flexor- driven regime. In the spinal- transected model (lacking supraspinal drives and presynaptic 
inhibition of somatosensory feedback), locomotion is entirely defined by sensory feedback from the 
hindlimbs, operating in a state- machine regime. Removing supraspinal drives on one side to simulate 
a hemisection enhances the gains of somatosensory feedback and its dominant role in controlling the 
timing of the transition between the flexion and extension states of the ipsilesional RG.
Modeling a lateral spinal hemisection represents an interesting and unique case. In the hemisected 
model shown in Figure 1B, the left and right spinal circuits still interact centrally as in the intact model, 
but the left contralesional circuits are mostly controlled by supraspinal drives, with the left RG mostly 
operating in a flexor- driven regime. On the right ipsilesional side, the circuits are mainly controlled by 
somatosensory feedback, with the right RG operating in a state- machine regime.
Simulation of tied-belt treadmill locomotion in hemisected cats
We used the hemisected model (Figure 1B) to investigate speed- dependent changes of cycle and 
phase durations in both the ipsilesional (hemisected) and contralesional (intact) sides in the tied- belt 
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  4 of 21
Figure 1. Model of spinal circuits controlling treadmill locomotion. (A) Model of the intact system (‘intact model’). 
The model includes two bilaterally located (left and right) rhythm generators (RGs) (each is similar to that shown in 
Rybak et al., 2024, Figure 3C) coupled by (interacting via) several commissural pathways mediated by genetically 
identified commissural (V0D, V0V, and V3) and ipsilaterally projecting excitatory (V2a) and inhibitory neurons (see 
text for details). Left and right excitatory supraspinal drives  
(
αL  and  αR ) provide activation for the flexor half- 
centers (F) of the RGs (ipsi- and contralaterally) and some interneuron populations in the model, as well as for 
the extensor half- centers (E) ( γL  and  γR  ipsilaterally). T wo types of feedback (SF- E1 and SF- E2) operating during 
extensor phases affect (excite), respectively, the ipsilateral F (SF- E1) and E (SF- E2) half- centers, and through V3- E 
neurons affect contralateral RGs. The SF- E1 feedback depends on the speed of the ipsilateral ‘belt’  
(
βL  or  βR ) 
Figure 1 continued on next page
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  5 of 21
condition. We simulated an increase in treadmill speed by progressively increasing the parameters βL 
= βR that characterize the speed of the left and right belts, respectively (Rybak et al., 2024). Similar 
to our modeling of intact cat locomotion (see Rybak et al., 2024), we assumed that despite a thoracic 
hemisection on the right side, cats can still voluntary adjust the left supraspinal drive, α L, to compen-
sate for treadmill speed and maintain a fixed body position relative to the external space. In contrast, 
after hemisection, the right part of the spinal circuits, including the right RG, is mainly controlled by 
somatosensory feedback, as all right supraspinal drives and their presynaptic inhibition of somatosen-
sory inputs are removed (Figure 1B). All parameters of the remaining pathways and neurons in the 
hemisected model were identical to the intact model parameters from Rybak et al., 2024.
Figure 2A1 and A2 show changes in cycle and phase durations in the model on the left contrale-
sional and right- hemisected sides, respectively, with an increase of treadmill speed (βL = βR = 0.4–1.0). 
The results of simulations can be compared to our previous simulations of tied- belt locomotion 
performed using the intact model (Rybak et al., 2024, Fig. 5A) as shown in Figure 2B1 and B2.
Based on this comparison, the following qualitative observations can be made for tied- belt loco-
motion. (1) The intact side of the hemisected model shows speed- dependent changes of cycle and 
phase durations that are almost identical to those of the intact model (Figure 2B1). (2) The lesioned 
side shows an increase in flexor phase durations and a decrease of extensor phase durations relative 
to the intact state without changes in cycle durations (Figure 2B2).
Simulation of split-belt treadmill locomotion in hemisected cats
Speed- dependent control of cycle and phase durations during locomotion on a split- belt treadmill 
significantly depends on whether the intact or lesioned limb is stepping on the slow or fast belt 
(Lecomte et al., 2022). Note that, according to our concept (Rybak et al., 2024), the intact side 
is mostly controlled by the supraspinal drives, whereas the hemisected side is mainly controlled by 
somatosensory feedback. We followed our previous experimental and modeling studies, in which the 
speed of the slow belt was fixed at 0.4 m/s in experiments and β = 0.4 in the model, and the speed 
on the fast side progressively increased from 0.5 to 1.0 m/s in experiments and from β = 0.5 to β = 
1.0 in the model.
Left slow/Right fast condition
Figure 3A1 and A2 show the results of our simulation using the hemisected model in the Left slow/
Right fast condition, with the limb controlled by the left contralesional side of the network stepping 
on the slow belt (β L = 0.4) and the limb controlled by the right ipsilesional side stepping on the fast 
belt at speeds increasing from βR = 0.5 to βR = 1.0. With an increase of βR, cycle and phase durations 
of the left contralesional (slow) side remained relatively constant (Figure 3A1), whereas on the right- 
hemisected (fast) side, we observed a pronounced speed- dependent reduction of extensor phase 
durations compensated by a corresponding increase of flexor phase durations. In the right ipsilesional 
hindlimb, stance and swing phase durations intersected at βR = 0.6- 0.7 and, with a further increase of 
βR, the duty factor became less than 50% (Figure 3A2).
By comparing speed- dependent changes in cycle and phase durations obtained from the intact 
model in our previous simulations (Rybak et al., 2024, Fig. 6A), we can see that on the left contral-
esional (slow) side, cycle and extensor phase durations are longer in comparison to the intact model 
without noticeable differences in flexor phase durations (Figure 3). The most dramatic changes rela-
tive to the intact model were seen on the right- hemisected (fast) side where a significant speed- 
dependent reduction of extension and corresponding increase of flexion occurred with a duty factor 
falling below 50% in the middle of the speed interval (Figure  3B2). These changes of locomotor 
characteristics on the hemisected side resemble those in the fully spinal- transected model (see Rybak 
and contributes to the extension- to- flexion transition on the ipsilateral side. The SF- E2 feedback activates the 
ipsilateral E half- center and contributes to ‘weight support’ on the ipsilateral side. The ipsilateral excitatory drives 
( αL and αR ) suppress the effects of all ipsilateral feedback inputs by presynaptic inhibition. The detailed description 
and all model parameters can be found in the preceding paper (Rybak et al., 2024). (B) Model of the right- 
hemisected system. All supraspinal drives on the right side (and their suppression of sensory feedback from the 
right limb) are eliminated from the schematic shown in (A).
Figure 1 continued
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  6 of 21
et al., 2024, Fig. 6B, right). This is because the left- side drive is small at slow speeds and there is not 
much drive from the left side to the right side even though the latter is still receiving some supraspinal 
drive, as opposed to the full transection model.
Left fast/Right slow conditions
Figure  4A1 and A2 show the results of our simulation using the hemisected model in the Left 
fast/Right slow conditions, with the limb controlled by the left contralesional side of the network 
stepping on the fast belt (βL increasing from 0.5 to 1.0) and the limb controlled by the right ipsilesional 
side stepping on the slow belt (βR = 0.4). In this case, cycle and phase durations on both sides do not 
change much with an increase of βL (cycle and extension durations slightly decrease on both sides and 
the flexion durations slightly increase on the intact side and slightly decrease on the hemisected side; 
Figure 4A1 and A2). Comparisons with the corresponding speed- dependent changes in cycle and 
Figure 2. Simulation of locomotion on a tied- belt treadmill using the right- hemisected model. (A1, A2) Changes in the durations of cycle period and 
extensor/stance and flexor/swing phases during simulated tied- belt locomotion on the left contralesional (A1) and right ipsilesional (A2) sides of the 
model with an increasing simulated treadmill speed. (B1, B2) The curves from panels (A1) and (A2) for the hemisected model are superimposed with 
the corresponding curves obtained from the intact model (modified from Rybak et al., 2024, Fig. 5A).
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  7 of 21
phase durations in our intact model (Rybak et al., 2024, Fig. 6A) show similar changes for both fast 
and slow sides (Figure 4B1 and B2).
Based on our simulations, we formulated the following modeling predictions:
1. During tied- belt treadmill locomotion, speed- dependent changes of cycle and phase durations 
of the contralesional hindlimb are similar to those in the intact conditions, whereas the ipsile-
sional hindlimb shows noticeable changes in comparison with the intact conditions, such as 
shorter stance phases and longer swing phases.
2. During split- belt treadmill locomotion with the ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the fast belt, 
cycle and stance durations of the contralesional hindlimb increase relative to the intact condi-
tion without noticeable changes in swing durations. At the same time, the most significant 
changes are observed on the ipsilesional side where the hindlimb is stepping on the fast belt. 
Specifically, in the right ipsilesional hindlimb, stance phases considerably decrease, and swing 
Figure 3. Simulation of locomotion on a split- belt treadmill using the right- hemisected model in the Left slow/Right fast condition, with the ipsilesional 
hindlimb stepping on the fast belt. (A1, A2) Changes in the durations of cycle period and extensor/stance and flexor/swing phases during simulated 
split- belt locomotion on the left contralesional (A1) and right ipsilesional (A2) sides of the model. (B1, B2) The curves from panels (A1) and (A2) for the 
hemisected model are superimposed with the corresponding curves obtained from the intact model (modified from Rybak et al., 2024, Fig. 5A).
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  8 of 21
phases increase with speed. As a result, swing durations begin to exceed stance durations (duty 
factor become less than 50%). Hence, having the ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the fast belt 
makes locomotion more asymmetric (limping).
3. During split- belt treadmill locomotion with the ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the slow belt, 
changes in cycle and phase durations in both hindlimbs with an increase of the speed of the 
fast belt are similar to those of intact cats. Hence, having the ‘injured’ hindlimb stepping on the 
slow belt makes locomotion more similar to locomotion of intact cats and more symmetrical, 
reducing limping.
Figure 4. Simulation of locomotion on a split- belt treadmill using the right- hemisected model in the Left fast/Right slow conditions, with the ipsilesional 
hindlimb stepping on the slow belt. (A1, A2) Changes in the durations of locomotor period and extensor/stance and flexor/swing phases during 
simulated split- belt locomotion on the left contralesional (A1) and right ipsilesional (A2) sides of the model. (B1, B2) The curves from panels (A1) and 
(A2) for the hemisected model are superimposed with the corresponding curves obtained from the intact model (modified from Rybak et al., 2024, 
Fig. 5A).
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  9 of 21
Studying the effects of thoracic lateral hemisection on cycle and phase 
durations during tied-belt and split-belt locomotion in cats
Experimental procedures
We recorded cycle and phase durations of the left and right hindlimbs before and after a mid- thoracic 
(T5- T6) lateral hemisection on the right side in nine cats during tied- belt locomotion from 0.4 to 
1.0 m/s, and in eight cats during split- belt locomotion with the slow side stepping at 0.4 m/s and 
the fast side stepping from 0.5 m/s to 1.0 m/s. For this study, we only retained for analysis cats that 
stepped up to 1.0 m/s during tied- belt (n = 5) and split- belt (n = 6) locomotion 7–8 weeks after hemi-
section. During split- belt locomotion, both the right ipsilesional (hemisected) and left contralesional 
limbs stepped on the slow or fast belts.
Tied-belt locomotion
Figure 5 shows speed- dependent changes in cycle, stance, and swing durations of both hindlimbs 
during tied- belt locomotion in cats before (intact, Figure 5A and A2) and 7–8 weeks after hemisec-
tion (Figure 5B1 and B2), as well as their comparisons (Figure 5C1 and C2). During tied- belt loco-
motion, cycle duration significantly decreased with increasing speed in the left (p=1.81 × 10 –12) and 
right (p=1.01 × 10 –12) hindlimbs with no significant difference between the intact (Figure 5A1 and 
A2) and hemisected (Figure 5B1 and B2) states (p=0.074 and p=0.076 for the left and right hind-
limbs, respectively) (Figure 5C1 and C2). Stance phase durations also significantly decreased with 
increasing speed for the left (p=1.07 × 10–17) and right (p=3.14 × 10–18) hindlimbs. Stance duration was 
noticeably longer after hemisection for the left contralesional hindlimb (p=0.045), but not for the right 
ipsilesional hindlimb (p=0.278). Swing duration significantly decreased with increasing speed after 
hemisection for the left contralesional hindlimb (p=0.011) and the right ipsilesional hindlimb (p=5.99 
× 10–5). Overall, the hemisection had no significant effect on swing duration for the left contralesional 
hindlimb compared to intact (p=0.231, Figure 5C1). However, in the right ipsilesional hindlimb, swing 
duration across speeds became significantly longer after hemisection compared to intact (p=0.033, 
Figure 5C2).
Experimental results were similar to simulated results (Figure  5—figure supplement 1) during 
tied- belt locomotion for the following. (1) On the contralesional left side of hemisected cats, speed- 
dependent changes of cycle and phase durations were qualitatively similar to those of intact cats. (2) 
On the ipsilesional side of hemisected cats, cycle and phase durations changed considerably, particu-
larly because of a large proportional increase of the swing phase duration. However, in contrast to our 
simulations, the stance durations on the right ipsilesional side did not change following hemisection.
Split-belt locomotion
Note that in our experiments the hemisection was always made on the right side. For split- belt loco-
motion, two condition types were applied, similar to that in the modeling: (1) Left slow/Right fast and 
(2) left fast/Right slow conditions, in which the right ipsilesional hindlimb stepped on the fast and slow 
belts, respectively. Slow always refers to a belt speed of 0.4 m/s while fast refers to belt speeds from 
0.5 m/s to 1.0 m/s.
Left slow/Right fast condition
The results of cycle and phase durations for the Left slow/Right fast condition are shown in Figure 6 
before (Figure 6A1 and A2) and 7–8 weeks after hemisection (Figure 6B1 and B2), as well as compar-
isons before and after hemisection (Figure 6C1 and C2).
Cycle duration slightly decreased with increasing right belt speed in the left (p=1.2 × 10–7) and right 
(p=1.87 × 10 –7) hindlimbs. After hemisection, cycle duration across speeds was significantly greater 
compared to the intact state for the left (p=0.044) and right (p=0.046) hindlimbs. Additionally, after 
hemisection, stance durations across speeds were significantly greater compared to the intact state for 
the left side (p=0.034) without significant differences in swing durations on the same side (p=0.096). 
We found small but significant decreases in stance (p=0.005) and swing (p=2.40 × 10–11) durations for 
the left hindlimb with increasing right belt speed. The effects of speed were much more pronounced 
for the right hindlimb, where stance (p=1.53 × 10–15) and swing (p=7.18 × 10–9) durations significantly 
decreased and increased with an increase in right belt speed. The most noticeable changes after 
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  10 of 21
Figure 5. Cycle and phase durations before and after a right thoracic lateral hemisection in cats walking on a tied- 
belt treadmill. (A1, A2) Changes in the durations of cycle period and stance and swing phases during tied- belt 
locomotion in intact cats (before hemisection). (B1, B2) The same characteristics obtained from cats 7–8 weeks 
Figure 5 continued on next page
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  11 of 21
hemisection occurred in the right ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the fast belt. Swing (p=0.024) but 
not stance (p=0.161) durations were significantly greater after hemisection compared to the intact 
state. As a result, swing durations in the right ipsilesional hindlimb became longer than stance dura-
tion at speeds of 0.7 m/s and above (with a duty factor below 50%), which was not observed in intact 
cats.
Experimental results were similar to simulated results (Figure 6—figure supplement 1) in the Left 
slow/Right fast condition for the following. (1) In the left contralesional hindlimb, cycle and stance 
durations were significantly greater after hemisection compared to the intact state without signifi-
cant changes in swing durations. (2) In the ipsilesional right hindlimb, stance durations significantly 
decreased while swing durations increased with an increase in right belt speed. Swing durations 
became longer than stance durations at a right belt speed of about 0.6–0.7 m/s. Thus, with the right 
ipsilesional hindlimb on the fast belt, the asymmetry of stance and swing durations between the left 
and right sides increased. In contrast to our simulations, however, the hemisection did not change 
the stance duration in the ipsilesional hindlimb relative to the intact state, although swing durations 
increased, similar to our simulations.
Left fast/Right slow conditions
The results of cycle and phase durations for the Left fast/Right slow conditions are shown in Figure 7 
before (Figure 7A1 and A2) and 7–8 weeks after hemisection (Figure 7B1 and B2), as well as compar-
isons before and after hemisection (Figure 7C1 and C2).
Cycle duration significantly decreased with increasing left belt speed in the left (p=4.41 × 10 –11) 
and right (p=3.83 × 10–5) hindlimbs, with no significant difference between the intact and hemisected 
states (p=0.283 and p=0.212 for the left and right hindlimbs, respectively). Stance duration signifi-
cantly decreased with increasing left belt speed in the left hindlimb (p=1.02 × 10 –18) but not in the 
right hindlimb (p=0.131), with no effect of the hemisection (p=0.066 and p=0.996 for the left and 
right hindlimbs, respectively). Swing duration significantly increased with increasing left belt speed in 
the left hindlimb (p=0.010) while it decreased in the right hindlimb (p=3.79 × 10 –10). Swing duration 
was significantly longer after hemisection in the right hindlimb (p=0.003) but not in the left hindlimb 
(p=0.985).
The experimental results generally confirm our modeling predictions (Figure 7—figure supple-
ment 1) that spinal hemisection does not change cycle and phase durations on both sides in compar-
ison with the corresponding characteristics in intact cats when the ipsilesional hindlimb is stepping on 
the slow belt, other than a small increase of swing duration in the ipsilesional hindlimb.
Discussion
The goal of this study was to investigate the effects of a lateral thoracic hemisection on the operation 
of spinal sensorimotor circuits controlling the main temporal locomotor characteristics of cats walking 
on a tied- belt and split- belt treadmill over a range of speeds and left- right speed differences. We 
employed a combination of computational modeling and experimental approaches. We used our 
previously published model (Rybak et al., 2024) that described and highlighted the specific changes 
in the roles of supraspinal drives and somatosensory feedback following spinal transections, and 
hypothesized that after a lateral hemisection the contralesional (‘intact’) side of the spinal network is 
mostly controlled by supraspinal drives, whereas the ipsilesional (‘injured’) side is mostly controlled by 
somatosensory feedback. Using this network architecture and proposed operating regimes, we simu-
lated tied- belt and split- belt treadmill locomotion following a right thoracic lateral hemisection and 
computed cycle and phase durations. We then compared the simulation results with those obtained 
during experiments in adult cats, before and after a mid- thoracic hemisection on the right side in the 
same locomotor conditions. The simulated and experimental results concerning hemisection- produced 
after a right lateral thoracic hemisection. (C1, C2) The curves from panels (B1) and (B2) for hemisected cats are 
superimposed (for comparison) with the corresponding curves (A1, A2) obtained from intact cats.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison of simulated and experimental data during tied- belt locomotion.
Figure 5 continued
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  12 of 21
Figure 6. Cycle and phase durations before and after a right thoracic lateral hemisection in cats walking on a split- 
belt treadmill in the Left slow/Right fast condition, with the ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the fast belt. (A1, A2) 
Changes in the durations of cycle period and stance and swing phases during split- belt locomotion in intact cats 
(before hemisection). (B1, B2) The same characteristics obtained from cats 7–8 weeks after a right lateral thoracic 
Figure 6 continued on next page
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  13 of 21
changes in cycle, swing, and stance durations during tied- belt and split- belt treadmill locomotion 
across speeds were qualitatively similar. The following sections discuss the similarities and differences 
between simulated and experimental results, what these mean for understanding possible changes in 
the operation of spinal sensorimotor circuits after incomplete SCI, as well as limitations of the model 
and future directions.
Spinal sensorimotor network architecture and operation after a lateral 
spinal hemisection
Although our hemisected model is built on many simplifications, as discussed in detail in Rybak et al., 
2024, it generated cycle and phase durations that qualitatively matched those obtained experimen-
tally during tied- belt and split- belt locomotion. This provides additional validation of our model as it 
can reproduce not only experimental data in intact and spinal- transected animals (Rybak et al., 2024), 
but also, without additional changes or adjustments of model parameters, it makes several predictions 
on expected changes in locomotor characteristics following an incomplete SCI.
During tied- belt locomotion, the model predicted a decrease in cycle and stance durations with 
increasing speed following a right thoracic lateral hemisection, similar to the intact state (Figure 2), 
which we also observed experimentally (Figure 5). In both simulated and experimental results, swing 
duration increased on the ipsilesional side following hemisection compared to the intact state and was 
longer compared to the contralesional left side. Stance duration was also slightly longer after hemi-
section in the contralesional left hindlimb in both simulated and experimental results. Based on our 
model (Figure 1), the increase of ipsilesional swing duration is because of a greater influence of feed-
back from muscle afferents of right hip flexors (r- SF- E1) on the right flexor half- center due to the loss 
of presynaptic inhibition from supraspinal drive. The increase in stance duration on the contralesional 
left side, according to our model, could be due to increased inhibition from the right flexor half- center 
via commissural interneurons. In cats, we cannot exclude that they can use a voluntary strategy to shift 
weight support to the less affected hindlimb.
During split- belt locomotion in the Left slow/Right fast condition, the hemisected model predicted 
longer swing durations in the right ipsilesional hindlimb that became longer than stance duration at 
around 0.7 βR (Figure 3), which we also observed experimentally at a corresponding right belt speed 
of 0.7 m/s (Figure 6). Again, according to the model, this is due to the release from inhibition of the 
r- SF- E1 feedback and its excitatory influence on the right flexor half- center. The model also correctly 
predicted the increased stance phase duration in the left contralesional hindlimb after the hemisec-
tion, which based on the model may correspond to greater crossed inhibition of the left flexor half- 
center from the right flexor half- center. The stance duration of the left hindlimb stepping on the slow 
belt also increased compared to the right hindlimb stepping on the fast belt. This asymmetry in phase 
durations also generates an asymmetry in somatosensory feedback, particularly load- related feed-
back. Greater load- related group Ib feedback (l- SF- E2 in the model) for the left slow limb in the Left 
slow/Right fast condition increases excitatory inputs to the left extensor half- center, prolonging left 
hindlimb stance duration. In cats, we observe a greater body shift toward the slow belt and greater 
extensor activity in muscles of the limb stepping on the slow belt, consistent with greater group Ib 
feedback (Frigon et al., 2015; Park et al., 2019). In the Left fast/Right slow condition, the model 
predicted almost equal stance and swing durations for the left contralesional and right ipsilesional 
hindlimbs after hemisection compared to the intact model, with mainly a decrease in stance duration 
of the left hindlimb as speed of the left belt increased (Figure 4). This is qualitatively similar to what 
we observed experimentally (Figure 7). In summary, our computational model was able to predict and 
explain several experimental results.
hemisection. (C1, C2) The curves from panels (B1) and (B2) for injured cats are superimposed (for comparison) with 
the corresponding curves (A1, A2) obtained from intact cats.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison of simulated and experimental data during split- belt locomotion in the Left 
slow/Right fast condition.
Figure 6 continued
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  14 of 21
Figure 7. Cycle and phase durations before and after a right thoracic lateral hemisection in cats walking on a 
split- belt treadmill in the Left fast/Right slow condition, with the ipsilesional hindlimb stepping on the slow belt. 
(A1, A2) Changes in the durations of cycle period and stance and swing phases during split- belt locomotion in 
intact cats (before hemisection). (B1, B2) The same characteristics obtained from cats 7–8 weeks after a right 
Figure 7 continued on next page
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  15 of 21
Functional considerations
What we observed, with both simulated and experimental results, is that having the ipsilesional hind-
limb stepping on the fast belt increased the asymmetry between hindlimbs compared to the intact 
state, with longer swing and stance durations for the ipsilesional and contralesional hindlimbs, respec-
tively, in the Left slow/Right fast split- belt condition. In other words, having the ipsilesional hind-
limb step on the fast belt increased the left- right asymmetry observed during split- belt locomotion. 
However, having the ipsilesional hindlimb step on the slow belt in the Left fast/Right slow split- belt 
condition produced simulation and experimental results that were similar to the intact state. Why 
does having the ipsilesional hindlimb step on the slow belt reduce the left- right asymmetry generated 
by the lateral hemisection? We propose that it forces the ipsilesional hindlimb to increase its support 
as swing duration of the left contralesional hindlimb increases as left belt speed also increases. This 
increases the excitatory influence of r- SF- E2 or group Ib feedback on the right extensor half- center. 
Without this increase in the support of the ipsilesional right hindlimb stepping on the slow belt, the 
animal could not perform split- belt locomotion. From a clinical perspective, prolonged use of split- 
belt locomotion for rehabilitation might be a way to reduce asymmetries following lateralized neuro-
logical injuries, such as SCIs and stroke (Reisman et al., 2010; Reisman et al., 2013; Kuczynski et al., 
2017; Lecomte et al., 2022).
Limitations and future directions
The network architecture and sensorimotor interactions of the model are obviously based on many 
simplifications, as described in Rybak et al., 2024. For instance, the model does not account for 
the interactions between the fore- and hindlimbs (Frigon, 2017; Harnie et al., 2024) and does not 
include properties of the musculoskeletal system and a pattern formation network that shape neural 
outputs (McCrea and Rybak, 2008; Markin et al., 2016; Frigon et al., 2021). The lack of possible 
plastic changes in spinal sensorimotor circuits of our model may explain the absence of exact/quan-
titative correspondences between simulated and experimental data. In future computational studies 
designed to explain post- injury changes, it will also be important to consider neuroplastic changes 
that occur over time following SCI, such as changes in neuronal excitability and the establishment 
of new neural pathways (Raineteau and Schwab, 2001; Bareyre et al., 2004; Murray et al., 2010; 
Rossignol and Frigon, 2011). In the present study, we only compared simulated results to experi-
mental results obtained 7–8 weeks after hemisection, when locomotor recovery was relatively robust. 
Experimentally, it is also difficult to surgically perform a perfect lateral hemisection and some spinal 
tissue is often damaged on the contralateral side and/or spared on the ipsilesional side. Neverthe-
less, although some characteristic changes predicted by the model were not fully consistent with our 
experimental results, we observed striking similarities between our simulations and the consequent 
experimental studies. This indicates that modeling sensorimotor interactions can be a powerful tool to 
predict and mechanistically explain changes following complete SCI, possibly serving as tool to guide 
rehabilitation efforts.
Materials and methods
Modeling
The detailed description of our model used in this study and the full set of parameters can be found 
in our recent eLife publication (Rybak et al., 2024). To simulate a right lateral hemisection, all supra-
spinal drives from the right side were set to zero, transforming the intact model (Figure 1A) to a hemi-
sected model (Figure 1B). No other model parameters were changed. The simulation package NSM 
lateral thoracic hemisection. (C1, C2) The curves from panels (B1) and (B2) for injured cats are superimposed (for 
comparison) with the corresponding curves (A1, A2) obtained from intact cats.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 7:
Figure supplement 1. Comparison of simulated and experimental data during split- belt locomotion in the Left 
fast/Right slow condition.
Figure 7 continued
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  16 of 21
2.5.7, the model configuration file necessary to create and run simulations, and the custom MATLAB 
scripts are available at https://github.com/RybakLab/nsm (copy archived at RybakLab, 2024).
Experimental materials and methods
Ethical approval
All experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Care Committee of the Université de Sher-
brooke (Protocol 442- 18) in accordance with policies and directives of the Canadian Council on Animal 
Care. We obtained the current data set from nine adult purpose- bred cats (>1 year of age at the time 
of experimentation), five females and four males, weighing between 4.0 kg and 6.2 kg, purchased 
from Marshall BioResources (North Rose, NY). Before and after experiments, cats were housed and 
fed (weight- dependent metabolic diet and water ad libitum) in a dedicated room within the animal 
care facility of the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences at the Université de Sherbrooke. We 
followed the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0 for animal studies (Percie du Sert et  al., 2020). The investi-
gators understand the ethical principles under which the journal operates, and our work complies 
with this animal ethics checklist. In order to maximize the scientific output of each animal, they were 
used in other studies to investigate different scientific questions, some of which have been published 
(Lecomte et al., 2022; Merlet et al., 2022; Lecomte et al., 2023; Mari et al., 2023; Audet et al., 
2023; Mari et al., 2024a; Mari et al., 2024b).
Surgical procedures
After collecting data in the intact state, we performed a lateral hemisection between the fifth and sixth 
thoracic vertebrae (T5- T6) on the right side of the spinal cord. Before surgery, we sedated the cat with 
an intramuscular injection of a cocktail containing butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg), acepromazine (0.1 mg/
kg), and glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg) and inducted with another intramuscular injection of ketamine 
(2.0 mg/kg) and diazepam (0.25 mg/kg) in a 1:1 ratio. We shaved the fur overlying the back and the 
skin was cleaned with chlorhexidine soap. The cat was then anesthetized with isoflurane (1.5–3%) 
and O2 using a mask for a minimum of 5 min and then intubated with a flexible endotracheal tube. 
Isoflurane concentration was confirmed and adjusted throughout the surgery by monitoring cardiac 
and respiratory rates, applying pressure to the paw to detect limb withdrawal, and assessing muscle 
tone. Once the animal was deeply anesthetized, an incision of the skin over and between the fifth 
and sixth thoracic vertebrae (T5- T6) was made and after carefully setting aside muscle and connective 
tissue, a small laminectomy of the corresponding dorsal bone was performed. Lidocaine (xylocaine, 
2%) was applied topically followed by 2–3 intraspinal injections on the right side of the cord. We then 
sectioned the spinal cord laterally from the midline to the right using surgical scissors. We placed 
hemostatic material (Spongostan) within the gap before sewing back muscles and skin in anatomical 
layers. In the days following hemisection, voluntary bodily functions were carefully monitored. The 
bladder and large intestine were manually expressed if needed. At the end of surgery, we injected 
subcutaneously an antibiotic (cefovecin, 8 mg/kg) and a fast- acting analgesic (buprenorphine, 0.01 
mg/kg). We also taped a fentanyl (25 µg/hr) patch to the back of the animal 2- 3 cm rostral to the base 
of the tail for prolonged analgesia, which we removed 4–5 days later. After surgery, the cats were 
placed in an incubator and closely monitored until they regained consciousness. We administered 
another dose of buprenorphine ~7 hr after surgery. At the end of experiments, cats were anaesthe-
tized with isoflurane (1.5–3.0%) and O 2 before receiving a lethal dose of pentobarbital (120 mg/kg) 
through the left or right cephalic vein. Cardiac arrest was confirmed using a stethoscope to determine 
the death of the animal. Spinal cords were then harvested for histological analysis (Lecomte et al., 
2022; Lecomte et al., 2023).
Experimental design and data collection
We collected EMG and kinematic data before and at different time points after the thoracic lateral 
hemisection during quadrupedal locomotion on a treadmill consisting of two independently controlled 
belts 130 cm long and 30 cm wide (Bertec) with a Plexiglas separator (130 cm long, 7 cm high, and 
1.3 cm wide) placed between the two belts to prevent the limbs from impeding each other. In the 
intact preoperative state, cats were trained for 2–3 weeks in a progressive manner, first for a few 
steps and then for several consecutive minutes, using food and affection as reward. Once cats could 
perform 3–4 consecutive minutes of stepping, we started the experiments. For these experiments, 
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  17 of 21
cats stepped in a tied- belt condition from 0.4 m/s to 1.0 m/s and in a split- belt locomotion condition 
with the slow belt at 0.4 m/s and the fast belt going from 0.5 m/s to 1.0 m/s, with speed increments 
of 0.1 m/s. Both the left and right sides were used on the slow and fast belts.
During experiments, two cameras (Basler AcA640- 100gm) captured videos from the left and 
right sides of the animal (60 frames per second; 640 × 480 pixels spatial resolution). A custom- made 
LabVIEW program acquired the images. We analyzed kinematic data from videos off- line with a deep 
learning approach (DeepLabCut; Mathis et al., 2018), which we recently validated in our cat model 
(Lecomte et al., 2021). We determined contact of the left and right hindlimbs by visual inspection. 
Paw contact was defined as the first frame where the paw made visible contact with the treadmill 
surface. We measured cycle duration from successive paw contacts, while stance duration corre-
sponded to the interval of time from foot contact to the most caudal displacement of the toe relative 
to the hip (Halbertsma, 1983). We calculated swing duration as cycle duration minus stance duration.
Histology
After confirming euthanasia (i.e., no cardiac and respiratory functions), we harvested an approximately 
2 cm long section of the spinal cord centered on the lesion. Segments of the dissected spinal cord 
were then placed in a 25 ml 4% paraformaldehyde solution (in 0.1 M phosphate‐buffered saline [PBS], 
4°C). After 5 days, we placed the spinal cord in a new PBS solution containing 30% sucrose for 72 hr 
at 4°C, then froze it in isopentane at –50°C for cryoprotection. The spinal cord was then sliced in 50 
µm coronal sections using a cryostat (Leica CM1860, Leica BioSystems Inc, Concord, ON, Canada) and 
mounted on gelatinized- coated slides. The slides were dried overnight and then stained with a 1% 
cresyl violet acetate solution for 12 min. We washed the slides for 3 min in distilled water before being 
dehydrated in successive baths of ethanol (50%, 70%, and 100%, 5 min each) and transferring them in 
xylene for 5 min. Dibutylphthalate polystyrene xylene was next used to mount and dry the spinal cord 
slides before being scanned by a Nanozoomer 2.0- RS (Hamamatsu Corp, Bridgewater, NJ). We then 
performed qualitative and quantitative analyses to estimate lesion extent using ImageJ by selecting 
the slide with the greatest identifiable damaged area. Using the scarring tissue stained with cresyl 
violet acetate, we estimated lesion extent by dividing the lesion area by the total area of the selected 
slice and expressed it as percentage. Lesion extent estimations for individual cats after the right lateral 
hemisection ranged from 40.7% to 66.4% (50.3 ± 10.3%) (Lecomte et al., 2023).
Statistical analysis
We performed statistical analyses using IBM SPSS Statistics 22.0 software. To determine the effect 
of locomotor state and speed on cycle, stance, and swing durations during quadrupedal tied- and 
split- belt locomotion, we performed a two- factor (state × speed) repeated- measure ANOVA for each 
dependent variable. Significance level was set at p<0.05.
Additional information
Funding
Funder Grant reference number Author
National Institutes of 
Health
R01 NS110550 Ilya A Rybak
Boris I Prilutsky
Alain Frigon
National Science 
Foundation
2024414 Boris I Prilutsky
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the 
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Ilya A Rybak, Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Supervision, 
Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, 
Project administration, Writing – review and editing; Natalia A Shevtsova, Conceptualization, Data 
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  18 of 21
curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing; 
Johannie Audet, Sirine Yassine, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – review and editing; Sergey N 
Markin, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – review and editing; Boris I Prilutsky, Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing – review and editing; Alain Frigon, Conceptual-
ization, Resources, Data curation, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Project 
administration, Writing – review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Ilya A Rybak  
   https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3461-349X
Natalia A Shevtsova  
   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1971-9707
Boris I Prilutsky  
   http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0499-3890
Alain Frigon  
   https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9259-2706
Ethics
All experimental procedures were approved by the Animal Care Committee of the Université de 
Sherbrooke (Protocol 442- 18) in strict accordance with policies and directives of the Canadian Council 
on Animal Care. We obtained the current data set from 9 adult purpose- bred cats (> 1 year of age at 
the time of experimentation), 5 females and 4 males, weighing between 4.0 kg and 6.2 kg, purchased 
from Marshall BioResources (North Rose, NY , USA). Before and after experiments, cats were housed 
and fed (weight- dependent metabolic diet and water ad libitum) in a dedicated room within the 
animal care facility of the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences at the Université de Sherbrooke. 
We followed the ARRIVE guidelines 2.0 for animal studies (Percie du Sert et al., 2020). The investi-
gators understand the ethical principles under which the journal operates, and our work complies 
with this animal ethics checklist. In order to maximize the scientific output of each animal, they were 
used in other studies to investigate different scientific questions, some of which have been published 
(Lecomte et al., 2022; Merlet et al., 2022; Lecomte et al., 2023; Mari et al., 2023; Audet et al., 2023; 
Mari et al., 2024a; Mari et al., 2024b).
Peer review material
Reviewer #1 (Public review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504.3.sa1
Reviewer #2 (Public review): https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504.3.sa2
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504.3.sa3
Additional files
Supplementary files
MDAR checklist 
Data availability
Part of the current manuscript is a computational study. The simulation package used, the model 
configuration file necessary to create and run simulations, and the custom Matlab scripts are available 
at https://github.com/RybakLab/nsm (copy archived at RybakLab, 2024). The experimental data is 
available on Dryad at https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.bk3j9kdp4.
The following dataset was generated:
Author(s) Year Dataset title Dataset URL Database and Identifier
Frigon A 2025 Experimental data for eLife 
paper
https:// doi. org/ 
10. 5061/ dryad. 
bk3j9kdp4
Dryad Digital Repository, 
10.5061/dryad.bk3j9kdp4
References
Angeli CA, Edgerton VR, Gerasimenko YP , Harkema SJ. 2014. Altering spinal cord excitability enables voluntary 
movements after chronic complete paralysis in humans. Brain 137:1394–1409. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/ 
brain/awu038, PMID: 24713270
Audet J, Yassine S, Lecomte CG, Mari S, Félix S, Caroline M, Merlet AN, Harnie J, Beaulieu C, Gendron L, 
Rybak IA, Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2023. Spinal Sensorimotor Circuits Play a Prominent Role in Hindlimb 
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  19 of 21
Locomotor Recovery after Staggered Thoracic Lateral Hemisections but Cannot Restore Posture and Interlimb 
Coordination during Quadrupedal Locomotion in Adult Cats. bioRxiv. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.03. 
23.533936, PMID: 36993268
Bareyre FM, Kerschensteiner M, Raineteau O, Mettenleiter TC, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. 2004. The injured 
spinal cord spontaneously forms a new intraspinal circuit in adult rats. Nature Neuroscience 7:269–277. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1195, PMID: 14966523
Barrière G, Leblond H, Provencher J, Rossignol S. 2008. Prominent role of the spinal central pattern generator in 
the recovery of locomotion after partial spinal cord injuries. The Journal of Neuroscience 28:3976–3987. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5692-07.2008, PMID: 18400897
Barrière G, Frigon A, Leblond H, Provencher J, Rossignol S. 2010. Dual spinal lesion paradigm in the cat: 
evolution of the kinematic locomotor pattern. Journal of Neurophysiology 104:1119–1133. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1152/jn.00255.2010, PMID: 20573971
Danner SM, Shevtsova NA, Frigon A, Rybak IA. 2017. Computational modeling of spinal circuits controlling limb 
coordination and gaits in quadrupeds. eLife 6:e31050. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.31050, PMID: 
29165245
Danner SM, Zhang H, Shevtsova NA, Borowska- Fielding J, Deska- Gauthier D, Rybak IA, Zhang Y . 2019. Spinal V3 
Interneurons and left- right coordination in mammalian locomotion. Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience 13:516. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fncel.2019.00516, PMID: 31824266
Doperalski AE, Tester NJ, Jefferson SC, Howland DR. 2011. Altered obstacle negotiation after low thoracic 
hemisection in the cat. Journal of Neurotrauma 28:1983–1993. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2010.1457, 
PMID: 21682603
Duysens J, Pearson KG. 1980. Inhibition of flexor burst generation by loading ankle extensor muscles in walking 
cats. Brain Research 187:321–332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(80)90206-1, PMID: 7370733
Filli L, Zörner B, Weinmann O, Schwab ME. 2011. Motor deficits and recovery in rats with unilateral spinal cord 
hemisection mimic the brown- sequard syndrome. Brain 134:2261–2273. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/ 
awr167, PMID: 21752788
Frigon A, Barrière G, Leblond H, Rossignol S. 2009. Asymmetric changes in cutaneous reflexes after a partial 
spinal lesion and retention following spinalization during locomotion in the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 
102:2667–2680. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00572.2009, PMID: 19726726
Frigon A, Thibaudier Y , Hurteau MF . 2015. Modulation of forelimb and hindlimb muscle activity during 
quadrupedal tied- belt and split- belt locomotion in intact cats. Neuroscience 290:266–278. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.12.084, PMID: 25644423
Frigon A. 2017. The neural control of interlimb coordination during mammalian locomotion. Journal of 
Neurophysiology 117:2224–2241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00978.2016, PMID: 28298308
Frigon A, Akay T, Prilutsky BI. 2021. Control of mammalian locomotion by somatosensory feedback. 
Comprehensive Physiology 12:2877–2947. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c210020, PMID: 34964114
Full RJ, Koditschek DE. 1999. Templates and anchors: neuromechanical hypotheses of legged locomotion on 
land. The Journal of Experimental Biology 202:3325–3332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.202.23.3325, 
PMID: 10562515
Gossard JP, Brownstone RM, Barajon I, Hultborn H. 1994. Transmission in a locomotor- related group Ib pathway 
from hindlimb extensor muscles in the cat. Experimental Brain Research 98:213–228. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1007/BF00228410, PMID: 8050508
Grillner S, Rossignol S. 1978. On the initiation of the swing phase of locomotion in chronic spinal cats. Brain 
Research 146:269–277. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-8993(78)90973-3
Grillner S. 1981. Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods, and fish. Brooks VB (Ed). Handbook of Physiology, 
The Nervous System, Motor Control. Wiley. p. 1179–1236. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410130130
Halbertsma JM. 1983. The stride cycle of the cat: the modelling of locomotion by computerized analysis of 
automatic recordings. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica Suppl 521:1–75.
Harkema S, Gerasimenko Y , Hodes J, Burdick J, Angeli C, Chen Y , Ferreira C, Willhite A, Rejc E, Grossman RG, 
Edgerton VR. 2011. Effect of epidural stimulation of the lumbosacral spinal cord on voluntary movement, 
standing, and assisted stepping after motor complete paraplegia: a case study. Lancet 377:1938–1947. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60547-3, PMID: 21601270
Harnie J, Al Arab R, Mari S, Yassine S, Eddaoui O, Jéhannin P , Audet J, Lecomte C, Iorio- Morin C, Prilutsky BI, 
Rybak IA, Frigon A. 2024. Forelimb movements contribute to hindlimb cutaneous reflexes during locomotion in 
cats. Journal of Neurophysiology 131:997–1013. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00104.2024, PMID: 38691528
Helgren ME, Goldberger ME. 1993. The recovery of postural reflexes and locomotion following low thoracic 
hemisection in adult cats involves compensation by undamaged primary afferent pathways. Experimental 
Neurology 123:17–34. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/exnr.1993.1137, PMID: 8405276
Holmes P, Full RJ, Koditschek D, Guckenheimer J. 2006. The dynamics of legged locomotion: models, analyses, 
and challenges. SIAM Review 48:207–304. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144504445133
Ijspeert AJ, Daley MA. 2023. Integration of feedforward and feedback control in the neuromechanics of 
vertebrate locomotion: a review of experimental, simulation and robotic studies. The Journal of Experimental 
Biology 226:jeb245784. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.245784, PMID: 37565347
Kato M, Murakami S, Yasuda K, Hirayama H. 1984. Disruption of fore- and hindlimb coordination during 
overground locomotion in cats with bilateral serial hemisection of the spinal cord. Neuroscience Research 
2:27–47. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-0102(84)90003-8, PMID: 6598834
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  20 of 21
Kiehn O. 2006. Locomotor circuits in the mammalian spinal cord. Annual Review of Neuroscience 29:279–306. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.29.051605.112910, PMID: 16776587
Klishko AN, Akyildiz A, Mehta- Desai R, Prilutsky BI. 2021. Common and distinct muscle synergies during level 
and slope locomotion in the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 126:493–515. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn. 
00310.2020, PMID: 34191619
Kriellaars DJ, Brownstone RM, Noga BR, Jordan LM. 1994. Mechanical entrainment of fictive locomotion in the 
decerebrate cat. Journal of Neurophysiology 71:2074–2086. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1994.71.6.2074, 
PMID: 7931503
Kuczynski V, Telonio A, Thibaudier Y , Hurteau M- F , Dambreville C, Desrochers E, Doelman A, Ross D, Frigon A. 
2017. Lack of adaptation during prolonged split- belt locomotion in the intact and spinal cat. The Journal of 
Physiology 595:5987–6006. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1113/JP274518, PMID: 28643899
Lecomte CG, Audet J, Harnie J, Frigon A. 2021. A validation of supervised deep learning for gait analysis in the 
cat. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics 15:712623. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2021.712623, PMID: 
34489668
Lecomte CG, Mari S, Audet J, Merlet AN, Harnie J, Beaulieu C, Abdallah K, Gendron L, Rybak IA, Prilutsky BI, 
Frigon A. 2022. Modulation of the gait pattern during split- belt locomotion after lateral spinal cord 
hemisection in adult cats. Journal of Neurophysiology 128:1593–1616. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00230. 
2022, PMID: 36382895
Lecomte CG, Mari S, Audet J, Yassine S, Merlet AN, Morency C, Harnie J, Beaulieu C, Gendron L, Frigon A. 
2023. Neuromechanical strategies for obstacle negotiation during overground locomotion following 
incomplete spinal cord injury in adult cats. The Journal of Neuroscience 43:5623–5641. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0478-23.2023, PMID: 37474307
Mari S, Lecomte CG, Merlet AN, Audet J, Harnie J, Rybak IA, Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2023. A sensory signal 
related to left- right symmetry modulates intra- and interlimb cutaneous reflexes during locomotion in intact 
cats. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 17:1199079. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2023.1199079, PMID: 
37360774
Mari S, Lecomte CG, Merlet AN, Audet J, Yassine S, Arab RA, Harnie J, Rybak IA, Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2024a. 
Changes in intra‐ and interlimb reflexes from forelimb cutaneous afferents after staggered thoracic lateral 
hemisections during locomotion in cats. The Journal of Physiology 602:6225–6258. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1113/JP286808
Mari S, Lecomte CG, Merlet AN, Audet J, Yassine S, Eddaoui O, Genois G, Nadeau C, Harnie J, Rybak IA, 
Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2024b. Changes in intra- and interlimb reflexes from hindlimb cutaneous afferents after 
staggered thoracic lateral hemisections during locomotion in cats. The Journal of Physiology 602:1987–2017. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1113/JP286151, PMID: 38593215
Markin SN, Klishko AN, Shevtsova NA, Lemay MA, Prilutsky BI, Rybak IA. 2016. A neuromechanical model of 
spinal control of locomotion. In: Prilutsky BI, Edwards DH (Eds). Neuromechanical Modeling of Posture and 
Locomotion. Springer Nature. p. 21–68. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-3267-2_2
Martinez M, Delivet- Mongrain H, Leblond H, Rossignol S. 2011. Recovery of hindlimb locomotion after 
incomplete spinal cord injury in the cat involves spontaneous compensatory changes within the spinal 
locomotor circuitry. Journal of Neurophysiology 106:1969–1984. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00368.2011, 
PMID: 21775717
Martinez M, Delivet- Mongrain H, Leblond H, Rossignol S. 2012. Incomplete spinal cord injury promotes durable 
functional changes within the spinal locomotor circuitry. Journal of Neurophysiology 108:124–134. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00073.2012, PMID: 22490556
Martinez M, Delivet- Mongrain H, Rossignol S. 2013. Treadmill training promotes spinal changes leading to 
locomotor recovery after partial spinal cord injury in cats. Journal of Neurophysiology 109:2909–2922. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.01044.2012, PMID: 23554433
Mathis A, Mamidanna P , Cury KM, Abe T, Murthy VN, Mathis MW, Bethge M. 2018. DeepLabCut: markerless 
pose estimation of user- defined body parts with deep learning. Nature Neuroscience 21:1281–1289. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0209-y
McCrea DA, Rybak IA. 2008. Organization of mammalian locomotor rhythm and pattern generation. Brain 
Research Reviews 57:134–146. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.08.006, PMID: 17936363
Merlet AN, Jéhannin P , Mari S, Lecomte CG, Audet J, Harnie J, Rybak IA, Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2022. Sensory 
perturbations from hindlimb cutaneous afferents generate coordinated functional responses in all four limbs 
during locomotion in intact cats. eNeuro 9:ENEURO.0178- 22.2022. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO. 
0178-22.2022, PMID: 36635238
Murray KC, Nakae A, Stephens MJ, Rank M, D’Amico J, Harvey PJ, Li X, Harris RLW, Ballou EW, Anelli R, 
Heckman CJ, Mashimo T, Vavrek R, Sanelli L, Gorassini MA, Bennett DJ, Fouad K. 2010. Recovery of 
motoneuron and locomotor function after spinal cord injury depends on constitutive activity in 5- HT2C 
receptors. Nature Medicine 16:694–700. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2160, PMID: 20512126
Park H, Latash EM, Molkov YI, Klishko AN, Frigon A, DeWeerth SP , Prilutsky BI. 2019. Cutaneous sensory 
feedback from paw pads affects lateral balance control during split- belt locomotion in the cat. The Journal of 
Experimental Biology 222:jeb198648. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.198648, PMID: 31308054
Pearson KG, Collins DF . 1993. Reversal of the influence of group Ib afferents from plantaris on activity in medial 
gastrocnemius muscle during locomotor activity. Journal of Neurophysiology 70:1009–1017. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1152/jn.1993.70.3.1009, PMID: 8229157
 Research advance      
Neuroscience
Rybak et al. eLife 2024;13:RP103504. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.103504  21 of 21
Pearson KG. 2004. Generating the walking gait: role of sensory feedback. Progress in Brain Research 143:123–
129. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(03)43012-4, PMID: 14653157
Pearson KG. 2008. Role of sensory feedback in the control of stance duration in walking cats. Brain Research 
Reviews 57:222–227. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.06.014, PMID: 17761295
Percie du Sert N, Hurst V, Ahluwalia A, Alam S, Avey MT, Baker M, Browne WJ, Clark A, Cuthill IC, Dirnagl U, 
Emerson M, Garner P , Holgate ST, Howells DW, Karp NA, Lazic SE, Lidster K, MacCallum CJ, Macleod M, 
Pearl EJ, et al. 2020. The ARRIVE guidelines 2.0: Updated guidelines for reporting animal research. PLOS 
Biology 18:e3000410. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000410, PMID: 32663219
Raineteau O, Schwab ME. 2001. Plasticity of motor systems after incomplete spinal cord injury. Nature Reviews. 
Neuroscience 2:263–273. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/35067570, PMID: 11283749
Reisman DS, McLean H, Bastian AJ. 2010. Split- belt treadmill training poststroke: a case study. Journal of 
Neurologic Physical Therapy 34:202–207. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/NPT.0b013e3181fd5eab, PMID: 
21084921
Reisman DS, McLean H, Keller J, Danks KA, Bastian AJ. 2013. Repeated split- belt treadmill training improves 
poststroke step length asymmetry. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 27:460–468. DOI: https://doi.org/10. 
1177/1545968312474118, PMID: 23392918
Rossignol S, Dubuc R, Gossard JP . 2006. Dynamic sensorimotor interactions in locomotion. Physiological Reviews 
86:89–154. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00028.2005, PMID: 16371596
Rossignol S, Frigon A. 2011. Recovery of locomotion after spinal cord injury: some facts and mechanisms. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience 34:413–440. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-061010-113746, 
PMID: 21469957
Rybak IA, Dougherty KJ, Shevtsova NA. 2015. Organization of the mammalian locomotor cpg: review of 
computational model and circuit architectures based on genetically identified spinal interneurons(1,2,3). 
eNeuro 2:ENEURO.0069- 15.2015. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0069-15.2015, PMID: 26478909
Rybak IA, Shevtsova NA, Markin SN, Prilutsky BI, Frigon A. 2024. Operation regimes of spinal circuits controlling 
locomotion and the role of supraspinal drives and sensory feedback. eLife 13:RP98841. DOI: https://doi.org/ 
10.7554/eLife.98841, PMID: 39401073
RybakLab. 2024. Nsm. swh:1:rev:8316be749d1b5ab06bfb02493ca0f2bdb5418507. Software Heritage. https:// 
archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:bc7679ea1d8c096a4091e5f2b650aa80bbe1ba10;origin=https://github. 
com/RybakLab/nsm;visit=swh:1:snp:f1346ef785bda097d08024442fac3cd97500e4c2;anchor=swh:1:rev:8316 
be749d1b5ab06bfb02493ca0f2bdb5418507
Shams S, Davidson CL, Arain A. 2024. Brown- Sequard Syndrome. StatPearls.
Shevtsova NA, Talpalar AE, Markin SN, Harris- Warrick RM, Kiehn O, Rybak IA. 2015. Organization of left- right 
coordination of neuronal activity in the mammalian spinal cord: insights from computational modelling. The 
Journal of Physiology 593:2403–2426. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1113/JP270121, PMID: 25820677
Shevtsova NA, Li EZ, Singh S, Dougherty KJ, Rybak IA. 2022. Ipsilateral and contralateral interactions in spinal 
locomotor circuits mediated by V1 Neurons: Insights from Computational Modeling. International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences 23:5541. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23105541, PMID: 35628347
Thibaudier Y, Hurteau MF , Dambreville C, Chraibi A, Goetz L, Frigon A. 2017. Interlimb coordination during 
tied- belt and transverse split- belt locomotion before and after an incomplete spinal cord injury. Journal of 
Neurotrauma 34:1751–1765. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/neu.2016.4421, PMID: 27219842
Webb AA, Muir GD. 2002. Compensatory locomotor adjustments of rats with cervical or thoracic spinal cord 
hemisections. Journal of Neurotrauma 19:239–256. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1089/08977150252806983, PMID: 
11893025
Zhang H, Shevtsova NA, Deska- Gauthier D, Mackay C, Dougherty KJ, Danner SM, Zhang Y , Rybak IA. 2022. The 
role of V3 neurons in speed- dependent interlimb coordination during locomotion in mice. eLife 11:e73424. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.73424, PMID: 35476640